            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

CIS270

Programming for Scientific Applications

3 Credits

Prerequisite: MAT180

New Course

Fall 2004

Prof. Sandra Silverberg, Department Head, 201.612-5334

ssilverbergbergen.edu

Programming for Scientific Applications is a computer programming language 
course with emphasis on mathematical, scientific, and engineering 
applications using structured programming principles. Topics include data 
types      specifications, fixed and floating point arithmetic, input and 
output techniques, multi-dimensional arrays, external functions and 
subroutines. 



OBJECTIVES:

This course has been designed to introduce students to:

1. The fundamental concepts of digit computer systems.

2. Modern techniques for problem solving and algorithm designs.

3. Applications of these techniques to mathematics, science, and 
engineering. 



STUDENT OUTCOMES:

Upon completion of this course, the student will:

1. Have knowledge of the following data types: integer, real numbers, 
complex numbers, character strings and logical data 

2. be familiar with the fundamental binary operations of the above data 
categories 

3. be able write statements to handle inputs of any form

4. be able write statements to display output in any layout

5. be able to write program segments using standard decision and loop 
structures of the computer language 

6. be able to use one and multi-dimensional arrays to handle mathematical 
series and matrix operations 

7. be able to write a function subprogram as well as a subroutine subprogram

8. be able to write a complete computer program to solve a simple 
mathematical scientific problem using the above mentioned techniques. 



GRADE DETERMINANTS:

Student will be evaluated using a variety of methods which may include, but 
not be limited to, some or all of the following: 

 quizzes, exams, programming assignments, and term projects



TEXTBOOKS:

Learn Visual Basic 6.0 Now (with CD-ROM), Michael Halvorson, Microsoft 
Press. 

      ISBN 0-7356-0729-x



COURSE CONTENT:

1. Language: Data types Constants and variables Binary operations of         
    numerical data input methods and display of output data. Application: 
Evaluation of algebraic expressions and formula. 

2. Language: Conversions of data types Built-in functions of the computer 
language trigonometric functions. Application: Resolution of vectors into 
components addition and subtraction of vector quantities. 

3. Language: Conditional and un-conditional branching structured programming 
principles decision structures if-then-else and select-case syntax.         
Application: Quadratic equations classification of solutions based on values 
of the discriminant. 

4. Language: One dimensional arrays addresses and pointers multi-dimensional 
arrays. Application: Coordinate systems in mathematics Recording and 
collecting of experimental data matrices and arrays. 

5. Language: the iteration or loop structure Normal and exceptional exits 
nested loops. Application: Maximum and minimum mean and averages evaluation 
basic sorting techniques. 

6. Language: Computer graphics straight lines and circles general 
two-dimensional graphs. Application: Space-time graphical representation of 
a simple particle in motion graphical representation of experimental data. 

7. Language: Sub-Programs Functions and subroutine arguments and parameters 
passing by value and by reference. Application: Method of least square 
numerical methods for equations of one unknown numerical differentiation and 
integration. 
