            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

INF147

Web Development Using Dreamweaver

Credits: 3

Prerequisites: None Helpful:INF161 or INF162 or INF163 students who do not 
adhere to recommended co-requisites may not be successful in the course. 

New Course - Fall 2002



Professor Lucy Caruso-Deane

Department Head, Business

lcarusodeanebergen.edu



This course introduces students to web page authoring using a 
What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get editing environment. This course will focus on 
technical mastery of the software tools and techniques used to create web 
pages with Dreamweaver, and on an understanding of the technical and 
environmental issues that affect web page design, performance and 
effectiveness. Graphic design issues will be addressed in this context. 



Course Objectives:

01. Understand fundamental web environment concepts

02. Understand the various basic purposes of web sites

03. Create web pages using basic text, image and hyperlink components 

04. Manage the linking of components throughout a web site

05. Employ tables and frames in the layout of components on a web page 

06. Work with images and multimedia content

07. Work with animations and dynamic content

08. Incorporate interactive elements in a web site

09. Publish original web pages, including a comprehensive final project



Course Content:

01. Introduction and Course Overview A First Web Page Web Site Basics: 
Purposes, Design, Attractiveness, Interactivity, Performance/Efficiency, 
Repeat Visits, Links, Visibility, Management/Maintenance Web Site Elements: 
Text, Images, Animations, Hyperlinks, site management tools Editing an 
existing web page, creating a simple web page User interface, workspace 
(Documents, Objects and Properties windows), controls, program features 
Editing an existing web page - importing an existing site Creating a simple 
web page - defining a new web site Banner text - Body text - Adding an image 
- Adding a hyperlink Previewing the web page - testing/debugging Publishing 
the web page - using FTP 

02. Web-page Editing Fundamentals Basic Site Control Formatting text - 
character formatting, paragraph formatting Importing text Saving and titling 
pages Site control - the Site window - relative/absolute links, file/folder 
management, path structure, site maps, creating a site from scratch HTML 
basics Viewing/editing/tweaking HTML source, HTML styles, meta tags Using 
Find/Replace with text and tags Inserting/editing line breaks Changing 
background and link colors Hyperlinks: external, internal, anchors, e-mail, 
image-map links 

03. Creating/Editing Templates - Creating/Editing Library Elements

04. Working With Still Images Converting images to GIF or JPG Issues that 
effect performance/quality In-line images, images in tables, images as 
backgrounds/watermarks 

05. Test 1 Page Layout with Tables Creating/editing tables - changing table 
layouts, formatting content in tables, sorting, table properties 

06. Page Layout with Frames Creating/editing frames - working with 
Framesets, Web pages in Framesets, frame link destinations 

07. Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) Defining styles - applying to elements on a 
page HTML styles and CSS styles Internal and external style sheets Editing 
and managing style sheets 

08. Creating And Working With Layers Creating Layers - - LAYER tag used to 
create DHTML layers - using the Layers palette - Layers and Behaviors - 
creating Layers using CSS styles - converting tables to layers and layers to 
tables - Layers and browser compatibility issues 

09. Test 2 Using Behaviors To Create Rollover Effects And Animations Using 
behaviors - attaching behaviors to objects, behavior modification Creating 
Rollovers, adding Image States to rollovers on Navigation Bars, using Insert 
Navigation Tool, multiple-event rollovers 

10. Adding Multimedia Elements Downloadable elements PowerPoint slideshows, 
Excel workbooks, Digital video 

11. Timelines and DHTML, Animations Technical issues relating to inserting 
and using animations Animations using Java scripts, VB scripts, Flash 

12. Test 3 Interactivity Writing forms and CGI scripts - accepting and 
storing input from the viewer/user Validating input Server Side includes, 
e-commerce systems, using XML Dreamweaver and database connectivity - 
UltraDev 

13. Work on Final Project - Overall Design, Initial Site Development

14. Work on Final Project - Completion of Site Development, Testing, 
Publication 

15. Final Project Presentation Wrap-up



Text: To be announced



Grade Determinants:

75 - 3 Tests

25 - Final Project Presentation
