INF165

Introduction to Linux

1 credit

Pre-requisite or Co-requisite: None

New Course

Fall 2004

Professor Lucy Caruso-Deane, Department Chair, 201.447-7214

lcarusodeanebergen.edu



Introduction to Linux provides a hands-on introduction to this open-source 
operating 

system. Students learn to configure a graphical desktop environment, install 
and 

configure office-suite applications, create a Linux server environment, 
configure 

basic services, and use Linux commands.



Objectives:

1. Explain the significance of open-source computing environments and GPL.

2. Install and configure Linux and services.

3. Install office applications.

4. Command the Linux operation system.



Course Texts and/or other study materials:

To be determined.



Grade Determinants:

Exams - 60

Hands-on Projects - 40



Course Content:

1. Introduction - Linux and the open-source movement in computing the Linux 
GPL 

   Linux sources and resources Linux implementation Red Hat, Suse, Debian, 
etc. 

   building a Linux server Linux boot kick partitioning - root, swap LILO 
boot 

   loader installation modes text, expert, graphic, kickstart.

2. X Window configuring X server window managers installing/configuring 
GNOME 

   and KDE.

3. Using a Linux file manager such as Nautilus navigating directories 
getting 

   listings and permissions folder and file management copying, moving, 
renaming, 

   deleting, creating new folders, finding files/folders.

4. Using shell commands file navigation/management/processing commands. I/O

   redirection, filter, pipe basic shell variables.

5. Test 1

6. More on shell commands commands for managing processes and users 
date/time 

   commands file system commands using a line-oriented editor such as vi to 

   create batch commands.

7. Understanding TCP/IP networking IP addresses subnet masking basic 
networking 

   commands: ipconfig, ping, traceroute, netstat internet service and port 
numbers. 

8. Internet services setting up Apaches web server configuring Apache web 
server, 

   setting up user accounts and permissions.

9. More Internet services setting up an FTP server setting up user accounts 
and 

   permissions setting up telnet services setting up DHCP services.

10. Test 2

11. Accessing Windows and DOS files mounting a DOS/Windows file system 
mounting 

    DOS/Windows floppy disks accessing DOS/Windows files.

12. Installing and configuring StarOffice ports to Linux Windows and Solaris

    UNIX other language implementations aside from English a basic tour of

    StarOffice compatibility and interoperability with Microsoft Office user

    interface comparison file compatibility StarOffice and XML file formats

    StarOffice and PDF.

13. Using StarOffice word-processing and spreadsheet software basic features

    interoperability between word processor and spreadsheet program support

    issues this course will focus more on the help-desk users point-of-view 
in 

    relation to StarOffice.

14. Using StarOffice presentation and graphics drawing software basic 
features 

    interoperability among all four components of StarOffice suite

    interoperability with other software applications other open-source and

    freeware applications: sources and resources.

15. Test 3
