            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

INF264

Networking Fundamentals II

Credits: 4

Prerequisites: INF164 Networking Fundamentals I Helpful:A certification 
Microsoft Office Skills Introductory programming or multimedia courses 
introductory electronics 

New Course - Fall 2003



Professor Lucy Caruso-Deane

Department Head, Business

lcarusodeanebergen.edu



Networking Fundamentals II continues to build skills needed to design, 
build, and maintain small to medium-sized networks. The combination of 
laboratory and lectures focus on a more detailed understanding of the Open 
System Interconnection (OSI) models, Wide Area Networks (WANs), routing and 
using the routers and associates router components. Students will learn how 
to start and setup routers while developing configurations consistent with 
the various operating systems and topologies. This course assists in 
preparation towards the CISCO CNA certification. 



Course Objectives:

01. Master Basic Content: Review of 1st semester concepts Routing Theory 
Router Components Router Setup and Startup Router Configuration 10S TCPIIP 
IP Addressing Routing Protocols 

02. Master Lab Skills: Router Configuration associated hardware and software 
tools and techniques 

03. Master Documentation Skills: maintaining engineering journal cable 
management techniques 

04. Master People Skills: working in engineering teams, self and project 
management, oral exams, presentations 

05. Achieve Awareness and Access: basic technological literacy awareness of 
IT careers preparation for 2 and 4 yr. EE, CS, and IT programs access to 
well-paying, learning-oriented jobs ability to design, install, and maintain 
internetworks 



Master Basic Content: OSI Model, Internetworking Devices, IP Addressing, LAN 
Media  Topologies, Structured Cabling, Electronics 

02. Master Lab Skills: PC hardware  software, patch cables, installation of 
structured cabling use of test equipment 

03. Master Documentation Skills: maintaining engineering journal cable 
management techniques 

04. Master People Skills: working in engineering teams, self and project 
management, oral exams, presentations 

05. Achieve Awareness and Access: basic technological literacy awareness of 
IT careers preparation for 2 and 4 yr. EE, CS, and IT programs access to 
well-paying, learning-oriented jobs ability to design, install, and maintain 
internetworks 



Course Content:

01. Examine router elements (RAM, ROM, COP, show).

02. Describe connection-oriented network service andconnectionless network 
service, and identify their key differences. 

03. Define flow control and describe the three basic methods used in 
networking. 

04. Identify the functions of the TCP/IP transport-layer protocols.

05. Manage configuration files from the privileged exec mode.

06. Identify the functions performed by ICMP.

07. Control router passwords, identification, and banner.

08. Identify the main Cisco lIOStm software commands for router startup.

09. Check an initial configuration using the setup command.

10. Log in to a router in both user and privileged modes.

11. Use the context-sensitive help facility.

12. Use the command history and editing features.

13. List the commands to load Cisco IOS software from: flash memory, a TFTP 
server, or ROM.. 

14. Prepare to backup, upgrade, and load a backup Cisco IOS software image. 

15. Identify the parts in specific protocol address examples.

16. List problems that each routing type encounters when dealing with 
topology changes, and describe techniques to reduce the number of these 
problems. 

17. Configure IP addresses.

18. Verify IP addresses.

19. Prepare the initial configuration of your router and enable IP.

20. Add the RIP routing protocol to your configuration.

21.Add the IGRP routing protocol to your configuration.

22. Configure standard access lists to figure IP traffic.

23. Monitor and verify selected access list operations on the router.

24. Configure extended access lists to filter IP traffic.

25. Monitor and verify selected access list operations on the router. 



Text: Online Multimedia



Grade Determinants:

Skill Exams: pass/fail

10 - Homework

30 - Journal

20 - Exams

30 - Final Exam

10 - Portfolio
