            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

INF265

Network Configuration I

Credits: 4 credits

Prerequisites: INF264 Networking Fundamental II Helpful: A Certification 
Microsoft Office Skills Introductory programming or multimedia courses 
introductory electronics 

New Course - Fall 2003



Professor Lucy Caruso-Deane

Department Head, Business

lcaruos-deanebergen.edu



This course applies the concepts and techniques acquired during prior 
coursework to perform LAN switching and LAN segmentation using routers, 
switches and bridges. Topics include Ethernet, Fst Ethernet, the benefits of 
segmentation, and LAN performance. Students will work with the IPX protocol 
and configure interfaces as well as monitor the operation of the router. 
Benefits of the Spanning Tree Protocol and virtual LANs will be explored. 
This course assists in preparation towards the CISCO CNA certification. 



Course Objectives:

01. Master Basic Content: Review of first two semesters LAN switching VLANs 
LAN Design IGRP Access Lists VLANs 

02. Master Lab Skills: Increasingly sophisticated router configuration 
(IGRP, Access Lists, IPX) switch configuration network troubleshooting 
skills 

03. Master Documentation Skills: maintaining engineering journal design 
documentation and electronic portfolio development 

04. Master People Skills: working in engineering teams, self and project 
management, oral exams, presentations 

05. Achieve Awareness and Access: basic technological literacy awareness of 
IT careers preparation for 2 and 4 yr. EE, CS, and IT programs access to 
well-paying, learning-oriented jobs ability to design, install, and maintain 
internetworks. 



Course Content:

01. List the required IPXTM address and encapsulation type.

02. Configure IPX access lists and SAP filters to control basic Novell 
traffic. 

03. Enable the Novell IPX protocol and configure interfaces.

04. Monitor Novell IPX operation on the router.

05. Describe the advantages of LAN segmentation.

06. Describe LAN segmentation using bridges.

07. Describe LAN segmentation using routers.

08. Describe LAN segmentation using switches.

09. Name and describe two switching methods.

10. Describe full- and half-duplex Ethernet operation.

11. Describe network congestion problem in Ethernet networks.

12. Describe the benefits of network segmentation with bridges.

13. Describe the benefits of network segmentation with routers.

14. Describe the benefits of network segmentation with switches.

15. Describe the features and benefits of Fast Ethernet.

16. Describe the guidelines and distance limitations of Fast Ethernet.

17. Distinguish between cut-through and store-and-forward LAN switching. 

18. Describe the operation of the Spanning Tree Protocol and its benefits. 

19. Describe the benefits of virtual LANs.



Text: Online Multimedia



Grade Determinants:

Skill Exams - pass/fail

20 - Oral Exams

20 - Journal

20 - Exams

20 - Final Exam

20 - Portfolio
