            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

INF219 
Database Administration
New Course: Fall 2008

Course Description:
This course covers the installation, configuration, deployment and administration of database servers.  Beyond basic installation and configuration issues, students will learn how to back up and recover data, administer users, transport data between databases, manage data, and configure networks for database access.  These concepts and skills will be explored using database software in a hands-on project-based environment.

Credits/Hours:
3 credits/2 hours lecture, 2 hours lab.

Prerequisite:
INF-101 Introduction to Information Technology and INF-160 Networking Technologies and Data Communications or by permission of the Department Head


Student Learning Objectives/Assessment Measures
1.	Install and configure a database server product. Written Exam/Lab Activity 
2.	Create and manage databases and users using appropriate tools and techniques to ensure a secure database. Written Exam/Lab Activity
3.	Backup and recover a database. Written Exam/Lab Activity

College Competencies:	 
1.	Technological and Information Literacy – Students will demonstrate computer literacy, and will be able to retrieve, organize, and analyze information using both technological and traditional means.	 
2.	Applied Knowledge—Students will demonstrate an understanding of, and apply, bodies of knowledge within and across disciplines.	 

Assessment:	
An average of 60% from combined assessment measures is required to demonstrate proficiency in course material.	

Four exams - 60%
Quizzes (at instructor’s discretion) - 20%
Assignments - 20%

Quizzes:
There may be several quizzes, each worth 10 points, given at the beginning pre-selected classes.  The quiz material will be based upon the prior lectures and labs, homework, and/or the reading assignments.  A quiz cannot be made up if missed.  A student entering class late, after a quiz has begun, will not be entitled to extra time to complete the quiz.  Students entering class after a quiz is completed will not be permitted to take the quiz and a zero grade will be assigned.

Testing:
Students are required to take examinations on the day and time they are scheduled.  If special circumstances require a test schedule adjustment, this must be worked out in advance with the instructor. If a student misses an exam (except for prearranged circumstances with the instructor) a zero grade will be assigned.

The instructor can be reached by telephone (see course outline for appropriate phone number), e-mail, or a written note can be left in the Divisional Office (during the day) A-306C or in the Evening Office L-113.  If there are extreme circumstances (documentation may be required) that prevent a student from taking a test or an exam according to the published schedule, the student should use one of the above options to contact the instructor before the next class.  An arrangement for a special testing schedule is solely at the discretion of the instructor.  A student who waits for the next class session to speak with the instructor will not be accommodated with a special test schedule.

It is the student’s responsibility to finish an examination correctly and completely.  Therefore, when computer Scantron forms are used as answer sheets, the student must use a Number 2 lead pencil and erase all stray marks completely.  The burden of proper erasure is at test taking time. Once the examinations are returned to the students, there will be no grade adjustments made due to inappropriate completion of the response form.

The use of electronic devices during exams is prohibited.  Any student using an electronic device during an exam (unless directed to do so by the instructor) will receive a 0 for the exam.

Assignments:
Assignments are hands-on productions that show the instructor that the student understands concepts presented in class and in the readings and can competently use specified software to apply specific concepts..

It is anticipated that students will spend at least 4 hours per week perfecting their skills and completing their assignments.  Some assignments are required for grading.  They must be submitted on the assignment due date, and cannot be handed in late.  Acceptance of late assignments is solely at the discretion of the instructor.

Some assignments are instructional and need not be submitted. However lab assignments that are correct and complete and submitted on-time will help students prepare for graded assignments, quizzes, and exams.

Homework:
In addition to any homework assignment given during class, it is a standing assignment that the student read each Lesson prior to its discussion.  Following the class discussion, the student should reread the material and work with the exercises.  It is anticipated that students will spend at least 4 hours per week reading the online material and working with the exercises and supplemental resources.

Policies:
•	Lateness – The roll will be taken at the beginning of class.  If the student is not in attendance at that time, he/she will be carried in the roll book as being absent unless the instructor is notified immediately after class.  Attendance sheets cannot be adjusted at following class meetings.
•	The student must adhere to all college polices.  Due to the nature of this course, it is recommended that the student review the policy titled “Acceptable Information Technology Use at Bergen Community College”.
•	The use of portable electronic devices such as pagers and cell phones is not permitted while class is in session.  Please be sure to silence electronic devices before entering class.
•	The use of audio CD or tape players, radios, and college computers to play music during class is prohibited.
•	Students are expected to demonstrate listening, reading, note taking, and writing skills.  The student will need to take notes during class discussions and understand and follow verbal and written directions.  All assignments and correspondence with the instructor (including e-mail) must be well written in full sentence format.  Proper paragraph format must be used for all postings to the student bulletin board (if applicable).
•	The subject line of all e-mail correspondence to the instructor must contain the course number and section and student’s name.  Any e-mail received without this information will not be opened.  WebCT email should be used for all course-related correspondence when it is available.
•	Plagiarism in any form will be treated as a failure to complete an assignment.  All work submitted should reflect individual effort by the student.
•	In borderline cases that arise in almost every class each semester, a student’s attendance, class participation, attitude, and observed effort will be considered in helping to determine the student’s final grade.

If the instructor does not appear after 20 minutes following the scheduled starting time, students should generate an attendance list.  One volunteer member needs to deliver the list, containing the course title, date, and instructor’s name, to the Evening Office (L-113) or to the Divisional Office (during the day) A-306C.

Additional policy and assessment information may be distributed by individual instructors.

Course Outline:
Week	Topic*	
1	Introduction to INF-219
	Introduction to WebCT
	Information Management Concepts
	What is Linux? (+lab)
	Introduction to Oracle Database Architecture
	Installing the Oracle Database Software (+lab)	
	
2	Introduction to Web CT
	Quiz – Terminology, Linux commands
	Oracle at Home
	Creating an Oracle Database (+lab)
	Managing the Oracle Instance (+lab)	

3	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Introduction to Oracle Tools
	Managing Database Storage Structures (+lab)	

4	Exam 1
	Administering User Security	

5	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Administering User Security – Continued (+lab) 
	Managing Schema Objects (+lab)	

6	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Managing Data and Concurrency (+lab)	

7	Exam 2
	Managing Undo Data (+lab)	

8	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Implementing Oracle Database Security (+lab)	

9	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Configuring the Oracle Network Environment (+lab)	

10	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Proactive Maintenance (+lab)
	Performance Management (+lab)	

11	Exam 3
	Introduction to Backup and Recovery (+lab)	

12	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Performing Database Backups (+lab)
	Performing Database Recovery (+lab)	

13	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Performing Flashback (+lab)	

14	Quiz Possible – Terminology & Commands
	Moving Data (+lab)	

15	Exam 4	

*Topics, quizzes, exams, and assignments may be modified as needed	

