            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

INF267

Network Security

3 credits

Pre-requisite or Co-requisite: INF160 Networking Technologies and Data 
Communications 

New Course

Fall 2004

Professor Lucy Caruso-Deane, Department Chair, 201.447-7214

lcarusodeanebergen.edu



Network Security provides a foundation level course that focuses on securing 
an enterprises systems and networks. Topics include email security web 
security system hardening 

incident response public key infrastructure disaster recovery basics of 
cryptography and methods for combating Spam, securing a server, and 
preventing denial of service attacks. 



Objectives:

1. Recognize various types of security attacks and specify appropriate 
action. 

2. Identify non essential services and protocols and know what action to 
take to reduce the 

risk of attack on these services.

3. Specify the hardware and software configuration for a secure network.



Accomplishment of student learning objectives will be assessed primarily 
through written 

exams and projects.



Course Texts and/or other study materials:

Network Security Fundamentals, Paul Campbell and Calvert, Ben ISBN 
0-619-13039-3. 



Grade Determinants:

Exams - 75

Homework/Projects - 25 



Course Content:

1. Security Overview - Authentication - CHAP, Kereberos, Tokens

2. Attacks and Malicious Code - Denial of Service, SYN attacks, spoofing

3. Remote Access E-mail, RADIUS, PPTP, L2TP

4. Web Security/ SSL, HTTP/S

5. Director and File Transfer Services

6. Wireless and Instant Messaging

7. Security Devices - Firewalls, Routers, Switches

8. Media and Medium - securing transmission media securing storage devices

9. Network security topologies

10. Intrusion Detection - anomaly detection, signature detection, shunning

11. Security Baselines - network hardening, application hardening

12. Cryptography - PKI Certificates, Digital Signatures, Hash Algorithms

13. Physical Security - passwords, surveillance, biometrics

14. Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity - computer forensics

15. Final Exam
