            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

INF266

Network Configuration II

Credits: 4 credits

Prerequisites: INF265 Network Configuration I Helpful: A Certification 
Microsoft Office Skills Introductory programming or multimedia courses 
introductory electronics 

New Course - Fall 2003



Professor Lucy Caruso-Deane

Department Head, Business

lcaruos-deanebergen.edu



This course seeks to differentiate among the following WAN services: LAPB, 
Frame Relay, ISDN/LAPD, HDLC, PPP and DDR. Key Frame Relay terms and 
features will be acquired to configure Frame Relays, LMls, maps and 
subinterfaces. Skills for identification of PPP operations to encapsulate 
WAN data on Cisco routers will be acquired. ISDN concepts and techniques 
will be introduced to enable identification of ISDN protocols, function 
groups, reference points, and channels. This course assists in preparation 
towards the CISCO CNA certification. 



Course Objectives:

01. Master Basic Content: Review of first three semesters WANs WAN Design 
PPP ISDN Frame Relay all CCNA Exam-related learning objectives 

02. Master Lab Skills: Increasingly sophisticated router configuration 
network troubleshooting skills all CCNA Examrelated skill objectives 

03. Master Documentation Skills: maintaining engineering journal design 
documentation and electronic portfolio development 

04. Master People Skills: working in engineering teams, self and project 
management, oral exams, presentations 

05. Achieve Awareness and Access: basic technological literacy awareness of 
IT careers preparation for 2 and 4 yr. EE, CS, and IT programs access to 
well-paying, learning-oriented jobs ability to design, install, and maintain 
internetworks 



Course Content:

01. Differentiate between the following WAN services: LAPB, Frame Relay, 
ISDN/LAPD, HDLC, PPP, and DDR. 

02. Recognize key Frame Relay terms and features.

03. List commands to configure Frame Relay LMls, maps, and subinterfaces. 

04. List commands to monitor Frame Relay operation in the router.

05. Identify PPP operations to encapsulate WAN data on Cisco routers.

06. State a relevant use and context for ISDN networking.

07. Identify ISDN protocols, function groups, reference points, and 
channels. 

08. Describe Ciscos implementation of ISDN BRI.



Text: Online Multimedia



Grade Determinants:

Skill Exams - pass/fail

20 - Oral Exams

20 - Journal

20 - Exams

20 - Final Exam

20 - Portfolio
