            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

INF164

Networking Fundamentals I

Credits: 4

Prerequisites: None Helpful:A certification Microsoft Office Skills 
Introductory programming or multimedia courses introductory electronics 

New Course - Fall 2003



Professor Lucy Caruso-Deane

Department Head, Business

lcarusodeanebergen.edu



Networking Fundamentals I exposes students to the skills needed to design, 
build, and maintain small to medium-sized networks. Students are provided 
with classroom and laboratory experience in current and emerging networking 
technology. Focus is on the theory behind LANs. Topics include safety, 
networking, network terminology and protocols, network standards, LANs, 
WANs, OSI models, cabling, cabling tools, routers, router programming, 
Ethernet, Internet Protocol addressing, network standards, safety and 
environment issues. This course assists in preparation towards the CISCO CNA 
certification. 



Course Objectives:

01. Master Basic Content: OSI Model, Internetworking Devices, IP Addressing, 
LAN Media  Topologies, Structured Cabling, Electronics 

02. Master Lab Skills: PC hardware  software, patch cables, installation of 
structured cabling use of test equipment 

03. Master Documentation Skills: maintaining engineering journal cable 
management techniques 

04. Master People Skills: working in engineering teams, self and project 
management, oral exams, presentations 

05. Achieve Awareness and Access: basic technological literacy awareness of 
IT careers preparation for 2 and 4 yr. EE, CS, and IT programs access to 
well-paying, learning-oriented jobs ability to design, install, and maintain 
internetworks 



Course Content:

01. Identify and describe the functions of each of the seven layers of the 
OSI reference model 

02. Describe data link and network addresses and identify key differences 
between them 

03. Define and describe the function of a MAC address

04. List the key internetworking functions of the OSI Network layer

05. Identify at least three reasons why the industry uses a layered model

06. Describe the two parts of network addressing, then identify the parts in 
specific protocol address examples 

07. Identify the functions of each layer of the ISO/OSI reference model

08. Define and explain the five conversion steps of data encapsulation

09. Describe the different classes of IP addresses and subnetting

10. ldentify the functions of the TCP/IP network-layer protocols.



Text: Online Multimedia



Grade Determinants:

Skill Exams: pass/fail

10 - Homework

10 - Journal

20 - Oral Exams

20 - Exams

30 - Final Exam

10 - Portfolio
