            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

MFG227

CNC Programming

Prerequisites: MFG224 Advanced Tooling, Materials, and Automation DFT210 
Computer Aided Drafting I or MFG119 Manufacturing Design I 

Credits: 4 credits

New Course: Fall 2002



Professor Mauro Marzocco

Department Head, Science Technologies

mmarzoccobergen.edu



This course provides the fundamentals of programming Computer Numerical 
Control Equipment with a heavy concentration on CNC turning and machining 
centers. Included in this course will be language and graphics based 
programming, automated features and capabilities, advanced CNC applications 
and integration. Students will receive hands-on programming experience using 
industry preferred software and controllers. 



Course Objectives:

01. Students will be capable of writing and storing a CNC program on a 
computer and use DNC to upload and download programs 

02. Students, given a blueprint and a process plan method, will be able to 
write and store on a computer a program to drive a collection of tooling 
through the tool-paths needed to produce the part shown on the blueprint. 
The program will require change of tools, change of planes, use of canned 
cycles, and tool offsets. Completed programs will be verified using CNC 
simulation software to detect errors and optimize programs. NIMS National 
Standard Excerpt 

03. Students will demonstrate the ability to set-up and produce a 1st 
article to specification, on a CNC turning or machining center 

04. Students will be able to set up the tooling and work piece qualify the 
work piece to the control prepare tools or load tools into tool magazine as 
required qualify the tools to the control with respect to the work match 
their identity to the program and establish initial tool values or offsets. 
The part specified should have at least two steps with /- .001 tolerance, 
one tapped hole, and arc/tangent surface, and require at least one canned 
cycle on the mill NIMS National Standard Excerpt. 



Course Content:

01. Background and history of CNC Machining, Controls, and Data 
Communication 

02. Cartesian coordinate system and rotary axis A, B, C

03. Programming Modes

04. CNC Positioning Systems: a. point to point b. continuous-path 
positioning contouring 

05. Programming Format including G-code and M-code

06. Linear, Circular, and Helical Interpolation

07. Tool Settings and Offsets

08. Work Settings and Offsets

09. Cutter Radius and Diameter Compensation

10. Programming Using Cartesian Coordinates

11. Subroutines or Macros

12. Part loading and programming options

13. Programming and Set-up for Milling Centers

14. Programming and Set-up for Turning Centers

15. Troubleshooting set-ups

16. CNC downtime causes and considerations, work holding and work changing

17. Advanced CNC Subjects: probing, on-machine inspection, tool length 
setting pallets CIM computer integrated manufacturing data management and 
advanced connectivity CAD/CAM Tool Life Management, Tool Load Monitor 

All machining courses will include instruction on safe operation of 
equipment, handling and storage of materials. 



Text: Basic Machine Shop Theory, William E. Hardman The Students Shop 
Reference Handbook, Edward G. Hoffman. 
