            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

MAT090 
Intermediate Alegebra Support
New Course: Fall 2009

COURSE DESCRIPTION:  Intermediate Algebra Support is a recitation class designed to provide additional DESCRIPTION:	instructional time for students enrolled in or repeating MAT-160.
CREDITS/HOURS	1 credit (non-degree), 1 hour
PREREQUISITE:	MAT-032 Algebra B or MAT-035 Algebra with a grade of C or better or equivalent by testing.
COREQUISITE:	MAT-160

STUDENT	LEARNING OBJECTIVES:
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
1.	Solve equations in one variable, including linear, quadratic, quadratic in form, 	and those containing rational expressions, radicals, or absolute value.
2.	Identify the differences between functions and relations.
3.	Evaluate functions and perform operations with functions.
4.	Factor algebraic expressions.
5.	Simplify arithmetic and algebraic expressions including those containing rational 	expressions, rational exponents, radicals, or complex numbers.
6.	Solve inequalities in one variable including linear, quadratic and those containing 	absolute value.
7.	Graph linear, quadratic, logarithmic and exponential functions.
8.	Find the equations of lines, parabolas, and circles given certain conditions, and 	apply this knowledge to concrete applications.

EXTRA HELP:
The Learning Assistance Center is located in L-125. The Center serves as a source of tutorial assistance in understanding the operations of basic mathematics and in problem solving. The Center does not function as a source of rote drill for the sole purpose of passing a test, nor is it intended to substitute for classroom teaching or for office hours. An exact schedule of Learning Assistance center Activities will be posted on the door of L-125. the office may be reached by telephone: 201-441-7489,

Online Tutoring is provided by Smarthinking. Applications for this service are available in the Learning Assistance Center or at the Learning Assistance Center Homepage. 

TEXTBOOK: Understanding Intermediate Algebra, Hirsch and Goodman 6th Edition, (Custom
          Edition for Bergen Community College) Cengage Learning

ASSESSMENT Student is required to keep a class-folder for this course. The class-folder should contain:
MEASURES:    
1.	This course outline;
2.	Class-folder due dates sheet;
3.	Hand-outs from this class;
4.	Graded assignments, quizzes, tests;
5.	Your weekly journal entry;
6.	Your weekly assignment

You are required to hand in this class-folder each week, at least twenty-four hours prior to your class meeting time. You may leave your class-folder in the instructor’s mailbox in A307. 

Record of Grades: When an assignment, quiz, or test is returned to you by your MAT-160 instructor, record your grade on this item on the class-folder due dates sheet. When you complete corrections to the graded item, attach the corrections to the graded item and place these papers in your class folder. 

Weekly Journal Entry: Each student is to keep a weekly journal. Your weekly journal entry must include:
•	A summary of the material covered in your MAT-160 class during the past week. This summary is to be written legibly and in good English.
•	A description of those topics where you are having difficulties, with an example of the type of problem that causes difficulties, specifically indicating the point at which the difficulty arises.

Weekly Assignment: Each student will be given an individual assignment. This assignment will be written on your journal entry. You are to work on this assignment during class. If you do not complete this assignment during class time, you must complete it prior to the next class meeting. This assignment is to be placed in your class-folder.

COURSE GRADE:	In order to pass MAT-090, a student must complete the journal entries complete the assignments, and not exceed the one absence limit. If a student hands in the class-folder each week, with all journal entries and all assignments completed, the letter grade for this course will be an “A”. The letter grade for this course will be a “B” if the student hands in the class-folder all but one week; the letter grade for this course will be a “C” if the student hands in the class-folder all but two weeks. If a student fails to hand in the class-folder for three or more weeks, the letter grade will be an “F”. If a student has more than one absence, the letter grade will be an “E”.
