            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



COURSE ID 

COMP225



COURSE NAME

Operating Systems Technology





NUMBER OF CREDITS AWARDED FOR COURSE

3 Credits





PREREQUISITE OR CO-REQUISITE COURSES OR ACADEMIC STANDING

COMP135 (Computer Architecture Using Assembly Language)





INDICATE IF NEW OR MODIFIED COURSE

REVISED4 credits to 3 credits

This course originally required an additional scheduled lab, which is no 
longer part of the course. 





NAME AND TELEPHONE NUMBER OR E-MAIL ADDRESS OF DEPARTMENT CHAIR

Thomas Setaro, Department Chair

tsetarobrookdalecc.edu

732-224-2403







DETAILED COURSE DESCRIPTION

Students will acquire an understanding of the role that an operating system 
has in the computing environment. The student will have hands-on experience 
and assignments on major operating systems. Topics will include process 
management, device management, file structures, utilities, performance 
evaluation and networking. 





OUTLINE OF COURSE OBJECTIVES

I. Introduction to Operating System Technology

II. Process Concepts

III. Thread Concepts and Concurrency

IV. Deadlock and Indefinite Postponement

V. Real Memory Organization and Management

VI. Virtual Storage Organization

VII. Virtual Storage Management

VIII. Disk Performance

IX. Files and Database Systems

X. Networking and Distributed Computing

XI. Web Services

XII. Security





TEXTS, JOURNALS, AND OTHER MATERIALS USED IN COURSE

Operating Systems, Third Edition, Deitel, Deitel, Choffnes, Prentice Hall, 
ISBN 0-13-182827-4 



Storage: A portable secondary storage media (i.e., floppy, memory stick, zip 
disk) 







GRADE DETERMINANTS  NUMBER OF PAPERS AND EXAMINATIONS

To be considered acceptable, a lab must be free of all syntax and logic 
errors and must meet all of the requirements outlined by the problem 
statement. Labs must also meet documentation and style requirements as 
outlined by the instructor. 

Testing:  A minimum of a 60 grade must be received on each of the tests. If 
that grade is not achieved you must meet with the instructor to review your 
progress. There may be one retest, with a grade of 70 being the highest 
attainable. A test will be given at the end of Units 3, 7 and 11 

The final grade requirements for the course will be:



GradeRequirements

AComplete 5 Unix Lab Projects

Complete Term Paper

Translator  Program

Receive test average of 90 thru 100 on all tests



BComplete 4 Unix Lab Projects

Complete Term Paper

Translator  Program

Receive test average of 85 thru 89 on all tests



BComplete 4 Unix Lab Projects

Complete Term Paper

Translator  Program

Receive test average of 80 thru 84 on all tests



CComplete 3 Unix Lab Assignments

Complete Term Paper

 Translator  Program

Receive test average of 75 thru 79 on all tests



CComplete 3 Unix Lab Assignments

Complete Term Paper

 Translator  Program

Receive test average of 70 thru 74 on all tests



DComplete 3 Unix Lab Assignments

Complete Term Paper

Translator  Program

Receive test average of 60 thru 69 on all tests

If a grade of D is received and you are a Computer Science Major, it is 
highly recommended that the course be retaken. 



FNon-completion of Lab Assignments, or Test average below 60.







SCHEDULE OF TOPICS TO BE COVERED

UNIT 1

Name of Unit: Introduction to Operating Systems



Unit Objective: To provide an historical perspective of how current OS 
environments have evolved. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of Translator Project and Test 1



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week



Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

Operating Systems: Early History

Emergence of Software Engineering

Hardware  Software  Firmware



UNIT 2

Name of Unit: Process Concepts



Unit Objective: To introduce to the student the concept of process, which is 
central to todays multi-tasking Operating Systems 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of Project 1 and Test 1



Estimated Time to Achieve: 2 week



Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

What is a Process

Process States

Process State Transitions

Process Control Block (PCB)

Interrupts

Context Switching











UNIT 3

Name of Unit: Thread Concepts and Concurrency





Unit Objective: To introduce to the student the organization and management 
of systems that support asynchronous concurrent processes though the use of 
threads. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of Project 1 and Test 1



Estimated Time to Achieve: 2 week



Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

Definition of Threads

Mutual Exclusion

Critical Sections

Mutual Exclusion Primitives

Dekkers Algorithm

Semaphores





UNIT 4

Name of Unit: Deadlock and Indefinite Postponement



Unit Objective: To introduce to the student the areas of deadlock. Included 
will be prevention, avoidance, detection and system recovery from deadlock. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of Project 1 (Translator) and Test 1



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week





Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

What is Deadlock

Indefinite Postponement

Deadlock Prevention

Deadlock Prevention and the Bankers Algorithm

Deadlock Detection

Deadlock Recovery











UNIT 5

Name of Unit:  Real Storage



Unit Objective: To introduce the student to the hierarchy of memory, and the 
schemes to organize and manage the different categories of storage. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of Project 2, Test 2.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week



Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

The different classifications of Storage organizations

Storage management

Storage Hierarchies

Contiguous and Noncontiguous Storage Allocation

Single User Environments

Multi User environments





UNIT 6

Name of Unit: Virtual Storage Organization



Unit Objective: To introduce the student to the concept and principles of 
Virtual Storage. 



Method of Evaluation:  Completion of Project 2, Test 2



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week



Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

Basic Concepts of Virtual Storage

Block Mapping

Paging Concepts

Segmentation





UNIT 7

Name of Unit: Virtual Storage Management



Unit Objective: The student will be introduced to the various strategies for 
managing Virtual Storage environments. 



Method of Evaluation:  Completion of Project 2 and Test 2



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week





Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

Virtual Storage management Strategies

Page Replacement Strategies

Locality

Working Sets

Page Size

Page Release





UNIT 8

Name of Unit: Disk Performance Optimization



Unit Objective: The student will be introduces to the variety of disk and 
disk-like devices that can be utilized in a multi-user environment. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of Project 3 and Test 3.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week



Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

Concept of the Moving-Head Disk 

Disk Scheduling

Scheduling Policies

Rotational Optimization

Performance Enhancement Techniques





UNIT 9

Name of Unit: File and Database Systems



Unit Objective: The student will be introduced to the various file and 
database formats. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of Project 4, Test 3



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week



Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

The File System

File Systems Functions

Fata Hierarchy

Blocking and Buffering

File Servers

Database Systems

Database Models







UNIT 10

Name of Unit: Networking and Distributed Computing 



Unit Objective: The student will understand the central role of networking 
in current computer systems. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of Project 4, Test 3



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week



Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

Network Topology

TCP/IP Protocol

OSI Layers





UNIT 11

Name of Unit: Web Services



Unit Objective: The student will understand characteristics of distributed 
file systems, peer to peer computing, grid models, Java technologies. 



Method of Evaluation:  Completion of Project 5, Test 3



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 week





Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

Distributed File Systems

Clustering

Peer to peer technology

Grid Computing

Java Servlets





UNIT 12

Name of Unit: Security



Unit Objective: The student wills the need for secure systems though 
authentication, access control and digital signatures. 



Method of Evaluation:   Completion of Project 5 and Test 3



Estimated Time to Achieve: 2 week





Learning Objectives:



The student will be introduced to:

Authentication

Access control

Security Attacks

Attack Prevention

Secure Communication
















