            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



COURSE ID 

COMP145





COURSE NAME

Introduction to UNIX



UNIX is a registered trademark of The Open Group

LINUX is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds





NUMBER OF CREDITS AWARDED FOR COURSE

3 Credits





PREREQUISITE OR CO-REQUISITE COURSES OR ACADEMIC STANDING

None





INDICATE IF NEW OR MODIFIED COURSE

REVISED4 credits to 3 credits

This course originally required an additional scheduled lab, which is no 
longer part of the course. 





NAME AND TELEPHONE NUMBER OR E-MAIL ADDRESS OF DEPARTMENT CHAIR

Thomas Setaro, Department Chair

tsetarobrookdalecc.edu

732-224-2403





DETAILED COURSE DESCRIPTION

Students will be introduced to the fundamentals of the UNIX operating 
system, command and tools.  Students will become familiar with the UNIX file 
system structure, editors and shell programming.  Students will learn 
networking in UNIX, as well as basic system administration.  Students will 
be able to contrast and compare UNIX with LINUX. 





OUTLINE OF COURSE OBJECTIVES



I. Concepts of the UNIX Operating System

II. Using the UNIX Operation System

III. The UNIX File system

IV. The Shell Command structure

V. UNIX processes

VI. Customizing the environment

VII. UNIX utilities and filters

VIII. Shell Programming

IX. Introduction to System Administration

X. Communications in the UNIX Operating System





TEXTS, JOURNALS, AND OTHER MATERIALS USED IN COURSE

Your UNIX the Ultimate Guide, Sumitabha Das, McGraw-Hill, Second Edition.  
ISBN:  0-07-252042-6 



In order to successfully complete this course you must have access to a 
UNIX/LINUX operating system. The Brookdale Computer Science lab on campus 
has the UNIX/LINUX operating system installed for your use. The Brookdale 
Computer Science lab is open Mon-Sat. Hours are posted outside the door and 
within the Department web page for Computer Science. Brookdale also provides 
students access to UNIX via the web. 



Additional Time Requirements:    

The student should expect to spend at least 2 hours of time outside class 
for each hour in class. 







GRADE DETERMINANTS

To be considered acceptable, a lab must be free of all syntax and logic 
errors and must meet all of the requirements outlined by the problem 
statement. Labs must also meet documentation and style requirements as 
outlined by the instructor. The final grade requirements for the course will 
be: 



GRADEREQUIREMENTS



AComplete Lab Assignments 1-13

Earn an average test grade of 90 thru 100 



BComplete Lab Assignments 1-12

Earn an average test grade of 85 thru 89



BComplete Lab Assignments 1-12

Earn an average test grade of 80 thru 84



CComplete Lab Assignments 1-10

Earn an average test grade of 75 thru 79



CComplete Lab Assignments 1-10

Earn an average test grade of 70 thru 74



DComplete Lab Assignments 1-10

Earn an average test grade of 60 thru 69

A C grade is required to advance to the next course.

      FEarn an average test grade below 60 or fail to successfully complete 
labs 1-10. 











SCHEDULE OF TOPICS TO BE COVERED



Unit 1: Concepts of the UNIX Operating System.



Unit Objective: To acquaint the student with the UNIX System and explain its 
structure. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 1 and test 1.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 Week



Learning Objectives:

The student will:



Define the UNIX Operating System.

Understand how the UNIX System works.

Describe the differences between UNIX and other operating systems.

Understand basic UNIX commands



     

Unit 2: Using the UNIX Operating System



Unit Objective: To familiarize the students with UNIX commands and general 
purpose utilities. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 2 and test 1.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 Week



Learning Objectives:

The student will:

Learn the UNIX command format 

Learn the UNIX System typing conventions.

Learn the rules for changing a user password.

Learn how to use the man, info and other commands for help on UNIX command 
syntax. 

Become familiar with the general purpose utilities including: who, date, 
cal, and tty. 

Learn to print.

Learn about a text editor.





Unit 3: The UNIX file system



Unit Objective: To show the student how to use the file system with 
appropriate commands. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 3 and test 1.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 Week



Learning Objectives:

The student will:



Understand the types and structure of files and directories

Understand how a file system is organized and how to move around it. (cd, 
pwd) 

3.   Access and manipulate files using ls, mv, cp, mkdir, rm, rmdir

Understand  Access permissions

Learn about the internal structure of files (inodes)

Learn about the mounting of files systems.



Unit 4: The Shell command structure



Unit Objective: To show the student how to use additional file-oriented 
commands in the UNIX operating system. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 4 and test 1.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 2 Weeks



Learning Objectives:

The student will:



Understand the shell as a command processor

Learn about wild cards (,, ).

Understand how the UNIX pipe facility works.

Learn about I/O redirection





Unit 5: UNIX processes



Unit Objective: The student will understand the UNIX process structure.



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 5 and test 2.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 Week



Learning Objectives:

The student will:



Understand the UNIX Process structure

Learn the process initialization sequence.

Understand the process control commands ps, nice, nohup, kill.

Understand how to run shell scripts in the background.

Understand the process signaling and exit sructure

Learn how to execute and terminate processes.

Know how to schedule a program to run.



Unit 6: Customizing the environment



Unit Objective: To learn how to customize the shell environment.



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 6 and test 2.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 Week



Learning Objectives:

The student will:



Understand the different Shells and their properties.

Understand how a shell operates on a command line

Learn about environmental variables.

Understand the concept of aliases and other features of the shell.

Understand the use of .profile and env files





Unit 7: UNIX utilities and filters



Unit Objective: To show the student how to use commands and pipes to create 
useful functions. 



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 7 and test 2.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 2 Weeks



Learning Objectives:

The student will:



Understand how the UNIX pipe facility helps to create new functions.

Access and manipulates files using pg, more, wc, diff, grep, sort.

Learn about editing commands head, tail, cut and paste

Learn about the tools: sort, uniq, cmp, find.





Unit 8: Shell Programming



Unit Objective: To utilize various control statements in a shell program.



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 8 and test 3.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 2 Weeks



Learning Objectives:

The student will:



Learn how to control the flow of a shell script using If then else and case 
statements. 

Learn how to construct a loop for repetitive execution of a command or group 
of commands using for and while loops. 

Learn about arithmetic options.

Learn how to debug UNIX shell scripts.

Understand Shell program design techniques.









Unit 9: Introduction to System Administration



Unit Objective: To learn how to manage a UNIX system.



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 9 and test 3.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 2 Weeks



Learning Objectives:

The student will:

Learn the basic scope of operations for a UNIX system administrator, 
including installation, configuration, hard disk management, and backing up 
a UNIX system. 

Learn about booting a system and various system states.

Learn about block and raw devices.

Understand the difference between being a regular user and a super user.

Be introduced to the concept of using shell scripts to accomplish system 
administration. 

Learn about key files for system administration.

Understand the concepts and command for monitoring the performance of the 
system. 





Unit 10: Communications in the UNIX Operating System



Unit Objective: To learn how to communicate with other users and systems.



Method of Evaluation: Completion of lab 10 and test 3.



Estimated Time to Achieve: 1 Week



Learning Objectives:

The student will:



Learn the function of /etc/hosts and DNS.

Learn how to check the network with ping

Learn how to use FTP and the limits of FTP

Understand the need for cryptography

Learn how to use telnet and ssh from UNIX 
















