            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



COURSE ID 

MATH022



COURSE NAME

Algebra Skills



NUMBER OF CREDITS AWARDED FOR COURSE

4 credits (for payment purposes)

No degree credit awarded for this Basic Skills course



PREREQUISITE OR CO-REQUISITE COURSES OR ACADEMIC STANDING

MATH021 (Introductory Algebra)



INDICATE IF NEW OR MODIFIED COURSE

REVISED  (Change credit hrs. from 3 to 4)

(Credit is changed to reflect added time spent in class using Graphing 
calculator) 



NAME AND TELEPHONE NUMBER OR E-MAIL ADDRESS OF DEPARTMENT CHAIR

Elaine Klett

eklettbrookdalecc.edu





DETAILED COURSE DESCRIPTION

This course provides students who have completed MATH 021 with the necessary 
skills and concepts to continue the study of algebra in MATH 151 or MATH 
161. This course begins with a review of MATH 021 and continues with 
polynomial and exponential expressions, factoring, quadratic equations, 
rational and radical expressions and equations. Problem solving is stressed 
throughout the course. Problems are approached from a variety of 
perspectives, including graphical, numerical, verbal, and algebraic. A 
graphing calculator is required  the specific model is determined by the 
department. This is a developmental course in the basic skills and will not 
be counted towards degree requirements. 





OUTLINE OF COURSE OBJECTIVES

After completing this course, you will be able to:

1. Demonstrate the mathematical skills appropriate to this course.

2. Use algebraic variables, expressions, and equations to analyze and solve 
application problems. 

3. Interpret problem solutions in the context of the situation.

4. Use a graphing calculator to understand concepts and solve problems.

5. Successfully participate in the next-level math course and other course 
for which this course is a prerequisite. 

6. 



TEXTS, JOURNALS, AND OTHER MATERIALS USED IN COURSE

Kaseberg, Alice, Introductory Algebra, A Just-in-Time Approach, 3rd edition, 
Brooks/Cole, Thomson Learning. 



This is a customized book.  It includes the homework assignments and review 
sheets developed by the Mathematics Department and it also includes the 
Student Solutions Manual and an iLrn (online course supplement) tutorial.  
The text is only available in the College bookstore. 

Graphing Calculator:  This calculator for this course is the TI-83 or TI-83 
Plus.  The use of any other calculator should be discussed with the 
instructor.  The TI-89 and TI-92 may not be used for testing. 

Graph paper: You should bring graph paper to each class. 

Ruler: You should bring a small ruler to each class.





GRADE DETERMINANTS

Your final course average is determined by a weighted average as follows: 

Test 1: 20 

Test 2: 30 

Test 3: 30 

Lab Grade: 10 

Quiz Grade: 10 

FINAL GRADE Your final grade is determined as follows: 

Final Course Average      Final Grade is:

90-100                    A

87-89               B

80-86               B

77-79                      C

70-76                      C

65-69                     F or INC

Below 65                   F







NUMBER OF PAPERS AND EXAMINATIONS

 LABS/QUIZZES/HOMEWORK 

In this course, you will be evaluated by means of tests, labs, quizzes and 
possibly homework. 

A. TESTS 

There will be three tests, one after each unit. Each test is cumulative and 
covers material from the beginning of the course. All supporting work must 
be shown on tests in order for your instructor to properly assess your 
understanding of the material. Graphing calculators are used on these tests. 
The tests will be given in class and it is expected that you will be in 
class to take the test on the day it is given. If you are very ill 
(verifiable with a doctors note) or you have some other emergency, you must 
contact your instructor immediately. 

Retesting for Test 1 and Test 2: If you pass a test with a grade of 70 or 
higher, you may not retest for a higher grade. For Test 1, if your grade is 
below 70, you have one opportunity for a retest. For Test 2, if your grade 
is below 70, you have one opportunity for a retest. The decision about 
retesting should be made in consultation with your instructor. A passing 
retest grade is recorded as a 70. 

Before retesting you must meet with your instructor and be prepared to show 
all your homework and corrections on the test. Your instructor may require 
additional work and/or a special session in the Math Lab. Your instructor 
will determine when you are ready for the retest. The retest must be taken 
within two weeks of the day the test was given in class, unless your 
instructor has made different arrangements. The grade on the retest, which 
will not be recorded as higher than 70, will be the grade used to compute 
your average for the course. 



Each test is graded on the basis of 100 points, the labs/homework are 
averaged to form your lab grade, and the quizzes are averaged to form your 
quiz grade. 

There are daily labs in this course. They are done in groups but handed in 
individually. The labs contain problems that reinforce the concepts and 
skills learned in class. There are also periodic quizzes and your instructor 
may also choose to use certain homework assignments for evaluation. 





SCHEDULE OF TOPICS TO BE COVERED

Unit 1:  In this unit, you will review topics from MATH021, add, subtract, 
multiply and factor polynomial expressions. 

Unit 2:  In this unit, you will write and work with negative exponents and 
numbers in scientific notation.  In addition, you will study quadratic and 
square root functions and their properties and applications. 

Unit 3:  In this unit, you will study applications involving direct and 
inverse variation and rational functions.  You will also study rational 
expressions and equations. 














