            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



COURSE ID 

MATH152



COURSE NAME

College Algebra  Trigonometry



NUMBER OF CREDITS AWARDED FOR COURSE

4 Credits





PREREQUISITE OR CO-REQUISITE COURSES OR ACADEMIC STANDING

A grade of C or higher in MATH151 is required as a prerequisite



INDICATE IF NEW OR MODIFIED COURSE

Revised





NAME AND TELEPHONE NUMBER OR E-MAIL ADDRESS OF DEPARTMENT CHAIR

Elaine Klett, Department Chair

eklettbrookdalecc.edu

732-224-2835





DETAILED COURSE DESCRIPTION

This course, followed by MATH 153, prepares students for the study of 
calculus. Topics include functions and function notation, rate of change and 
linear functions, transformations of functions, a review of right triangle 
trigonometry, graphing trigonometric functions, applications leading to 
sinusoidal graphs, trigonometric functions through the unit circle, some 
basic identities, solving equations, identities as tools for rewriting 
trigonometric expressions, the double and half-angle identities, quadratic 
functions, power functions, and polynomial functions. Problems are 
approached from a variety of perspectives, including graphical, numerical, 
verbal, and algebraic. A graphing calculator is required the specific model 
is determined by the mathematics department 





OUTLINE OF COURSE OBJECTIVES



Unit 1 Outcomes: You will:

Know the definition of a function.

Determine whether a graph, a table, or an equation represents a function.

Use function notation to express relationships and evaluate functions.

Evaluate a function at numerical and variable inputs and simplify the result 
algebraically. 

Given an output for a function, write and solve an equation (algebraically 
and graphically) to find the input. 

Determine the domain and range of a function.

Determine and interpret the average rate of change of a function on an 
interval 

Use a graph or table to determine where a function is increasing or 
decreasing, concave up or concave down, and write the result in interval 
notation. 

Determine the slope and equation of a linear function.

Interpret the slope and intercepts of a linear function.

Solve applications problems involving linear functions and interpret the 
results in the context of the situation. 

Set up a system of linear equations and solve the system graphically and 
algebraically. 

Know the properties of all the functions in the library of basic functions.

Graph a piecewise function and determine its domain and range.

Write a formula for a piecewise function from an application or a graph.

Graph a function using a transformation.

Find a formula for a transformed graph in terms of the original function.



Unit 2 Outcomes: You will:

Identify different types of angles.

Define the trigonometric functions as ratios in a right triangle.

Use the Pythagorean Theorem and trigonometry to solve right triangles that 
is, find all sides and all angles. 

Use trigonometry to solve application problems involving right triangles.

Define and use radian measure of an angle.

Convert between radian and degree measure of an angle.

Know the two special triangles.

Know the values of the trigonometric functions for special angles.

Find the values of trig functions for any angle.

Graph the six trigonometric functions by hand.

Know the properties of the graphs of the trigonometric functions.

Define the trigonometric functions as coordinates of points on the unit 
circle. 

Graph a sine or cosine function using transformations, including shifts, 
reflections, compressions, and stretches. 

Solve trigonometric equations graphically and using trigonometry and 
algebra. 

Find a formula for a transformed sinusoidal graph in terms of the original 
function. 

Model periodic phenomena using a sinusoidal function.



Unit 3 Outcomes: 



Review the algebra of algebraic fractions and solving equations and systems 
of equations. 

Know the fundamental identities, including all versions of the Pythagorean 
identities. 

Use identities to rewrite trigonometric expressions.

Know the double-angle identities for trig functions.

Rewrite trig expressions using the double-angle identities.

Solve trig equations using trigonometry and algebra and check graphically.

Know the definition of a quadratic function.

Graph a quadratic function by finding the vertex and intercepts.

Find the equation for a quadratic function given sufficient information.

Solve quadratic equations algebraically and graphically.

Solve applications problems involving quadratic functions.

Solve non-linear inequalities using a sign diagram.

Know the definition of a power function and a polynomial function.

Use laws of exponents to rewrite expressions.

Solve simple exponential equations.

Give the basic shape of the graph of a power function based on its power and 
the sign of the coefficient. 

Find the equation of a power function given two points.

Identify the long-run behavior of a polynomial function

Find the zeros of a polynomial function algebraically, when possible, or 
graphically. 

Graph a polynomial function by identifying the long run and short run 
behavior. 

Find the equation of a polynomial function given sufficient information.

Solve polynomial equations algebraically and graphically.

Solve application problems involving polynomial functions



TEXTS, JOURNALS, AND OTHER MATERIALS USED IN COURSE

1.Textbook: custom edition of  Barnett, Ziegler, and Byleen, Analytic 
Trigonometry and Connally, Hughes-Hallett, et al, Functions Modeling Change: 
A Preparation for Calculus,  John Wiley  Sons, 2006. 

2.Graphing Calculator: The calculator for this course is the TI-83 (any 
version) or TI-84 (any version).  The use of any other calculator should be 
discussed with the instructor.  The TI-89 and TI-92 may not be used for 
testing. 

3.   Graph paper

4.Ruler: You should bring a small ruler to each class.







GRADE DETERMINANTS

Grading Standard: 

In this course, you will be evaluated by means of tests, projects, quizzes 
and labs (and possibly homework). 



TESTS

There will be three tests, one after each unit. Each test will have two 
parts: a graphing calculator part and a non-calculator part. All supporting 
work must be shown on tests in order for your instructor to properly assess 
your understanding of the material. The tests will be given in class and it 
is expected that you will be in class to take the test on the day it is 
given. If you are very ill (verifiable with a doctors note) or you have some 
other emergency, you must contact your instructor immediately. Each test 
will be worth 25 of your grade. 





GRADING

Each test is graded on the basis of 100 points and is worth 25 of your 
grade. Labs, quizzes, and projects result in a combined grade worth 25 of 
your grade. Your instructors addendum will state the exact percentages of 
each. 

FINAL GRADE

Your final grade is determined by your final course average, which is a 
weighted average of your three test grades and your project/lab/quiz grade. 
Your final grade is determined as follows: 

If your final course average is
your final grade is
90  100
A
87  89 
B
80  86
B
77  79
C
70  76 
C
60  69
    D
Below 60
F
 To use this course as a prerequisite for another mathematics course, you 
must have a grade of C or better. 



Incomplete

INC is only given at the discretion of your instructor.  This may occur in 
documented cases of hardship or emergency.  In this case, you must meet with 
the instructor to discuss the work that must be completed to earn a grade in 
the course. All work must be completed within 21 days of the end of the 
term, exclusive of official college closings. 



Withdrawal

You may withdraw from the course, without penalty, up to a date set by the 
College. If you do not withdraw from the course but stop attending, your 
grade at the end of the semester will be F. 





NUMBER OF PAPERS AND EXAMINATIONS

LABS/QUIZZES/HOMEWORK

There are periodic quizzes in the course and there may be several labs. Labs 
are done in groups during class time and may be assessed either individually 
or as a group assignment. Your instructor may also choose to use homework 
assignments for evaluation. 



PROJECTS

There will be at least three projects for the course, to be done in groups 
outside of class. In the projects, you will apply the concepts and skills 
learned in class to a problem situation, present the mathematics, write 
careful explanations, and interpret your results. Specific guidelines for 
the projects will be handed out with Project 1. 





SCHEDULE OF TOPICS TO BE COVERED

Unit 1- In this unit you will study functions and function notation, rate of 
change and linear functions, a library of basic functions, and 
transformations of functions. 

Unit 2- In this unit, you will begin with a review of right triangle 
trigonometry, then study exact values for special angles and their 
multiples, the graphs of trigonometric functions, applications of sinusoidal 
graphs, the definition of trigonometric functions through the unit circle, 
some basic identities, and using identities to rewrite expressions and solve 
equations. 

Unit 3- In this unit, you will integrate algebra skills with new material by 
reviewing the algebraic skills needed to work with identities, continuing to 
work with the trigonometric functions, using identities as tools for 
rewriting trigonometric expressions, studying the double and half-angle 
identities, and solving equations using these identities. Then you will 
return to algebraic functions and study quadratic functions, power 
functions, and polynomial functions, as well as the skills needed to 
simplify related expressions and solve equations. 


















