            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

BURLINGTON COUNTY COLLEGE

COURSE INFORMATION FORM

This form must be completed for all new and modified courses offered for 
credit, including 

experimental courses.

I. Course Prefix and number: e.g. ART101: CIS 201

II. Course Title: Cisco Intermediate Network Security

III. Lecture Hrs. 4

V. Prerequisite(s):  CIS 200

VI. Co-Requisite(s):      

    VII. Dr. David Spang, Dean Science, Math, Technology, 609-894-9311 ext. 
1367,  dspangbcc.edu 



X. New Course

XI. Semester and Year Course will first be Offered (or, if a modified 
course, semester and year when 

revised course will first be offered): Spring 2005 (estimated date)

    XII. Relation of Course to Curriculum(s): Elective

XIII. General Education Designator (if course is intended to satisfy a 
general education requirement 

check appropriate designator):   TL  Technological Literacy



XIV. Catalogue Description:   This course is an intermediate level course in 
network security focusing 

on the overall security processes with particular emphasis on hands-on 
skills in the following areas 

advanced configuration of the Cisco Pix security appliance including AAA, 
IDS, VPN maintenance 

and management, enabling secure VPNs using IPSec technologies, configuring 
Cisco VPN 3000 

concentrators, VPN 3002 hardware clients and software clients and 
administering and monitoring VPN 

equipment and software in remote-access and LAN-to-LAN networks using IPSec 
protocols and 

features.     



XV. Course Objectives (Learning Outcomes): 

1.  Understand the concepts and operation of intermediate network security 
protocols 

2.  Configure and troubleshoot various network security devices

3.  Demonstrate competency by passing associated industry certification 
exams. 



    XVI. Textbook(s):  To be designated.



XVII. Other Course Materials to be supplied by Student:  

XVIII. Grading Policy (Number and Weight of Papers, Quizzes, Examinations, 
etc.) 

XIX. Detailed Description of Project Final Examination (if applicable): 

XX. Schedule of topics to be covered in Course: 



1.  PIX Security Applicance AAA

2.  PIX Advanced Protocols and Intrusion Detection

3.  PIX Failover and System Maintenance

4.  PIX VIN

5.  PIX Security Appliance Management

6.  Overview of VPN and IPSec Technologies

7.  Cisco VPN 3000 Concentrator Series Hardware Overview

8.  Configuring Cisco VPN 3000 for Remote Access Using Preshared Keys

9.  Configuring Cisco VPN 3000 for Remote Access Using Digital Certificates

10.  Configuring the Cisco VPN Client Firewall Feature

11.  Monitoring and Administering the VPN 3000 Series Concentrator

12.  Configuring Cisco 3002 Hardware Client for Remote Access

13.  Configuring Scalability Features of the VPN 3002 Hardware Client

14.  Cisco VPN 3000 LAN-to-LAN with Preshared Keys
