            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                  BURLINGTON COUNTY COLLEGE

                   COURSE INFORMATION FORM

                              

This form must be completed for all new and modified courses

offered for credit, including experimental courses.

  I. Course Prefix and number: CSE 256

  II. Course Title: Principles of Operating Systems

  III. Lecture Hrs.3   

  V. Prerequisite(s): CSE 111

  VI. Co-Requisite(s):

  VII. Dr. David Spang, Dean of Science,

Mathematics and Technology, 609-894-9311 ext.

1239, dspangbcc.edu

  X. Modified Course 

  XI. Semester and Year Course will first be Offered (or,

  if a modified course, semester and year when revised

  course will first be offered): Fall 2004.

  XII. Relation of Course to Curriculum(s):         Core

  requirement

                             General Education requirement

                             Elective

  XIII. General Education Designator (if course is intended

  to satisfy a general education requirement check

  appropriate designator):

        CM  Communications                HW  Health and

Wellness

        HA  Humanities                    TL 

Technological Literacy

        SS  Social Sciences               DGP 

Diversity/Global Perspective

        MLS  Mathematics and Laboratory Science

  XIV. Catalogue Description: This course explores the

  fundamental concepts of operating systems which, includes

  process management, memory management, device management,

  file systems, resource allocation, and security and

  protection. It introduces network and distributed

  operating systems.

  XV. Course Objectives (Learning Outcomes):

  1.  Understands concepts of monitor, deadlock, process

  scheduling and process synchronoization meansured by

  assignments, tests and quizzes

  2  Understands CPU scheduling concepts and can

  differentiate between algorithms meansured by tests and

  quizzes.

  3.  Understands storage management strategies including

  segmentation and paging schema measured by assignments,

  tests and quizzzes.

  4.  Understands schema for file system implementation and

  can demonstrate and or explain, measured by  assignments,

  tests and quizzzes.

  5. Understands concepts of,  and some implementation

  strategies for protection and security, as measured by

  assignments, tests and quizzzes.

  XVI. Textbook(s): Abraham Silberschatz, Peter Baer

  Galvin, Greg Gagne Operating Systems Concepts, Windows

  XP Update Edition, Sixth Edition.  ISBN: 0-471-25060-0

  

  XVII. Other Course Materials to be supplied by Student:

  Media: diskettes, USB disk, etc.

  XVIII. Grading Policy (Number and Weight of Papers,

  Quizzes, Examinations, etc.)

  

  Tests .........            60            3 tests 20

  including final

  Quizes .........          10            no make up, drop

  lowest score

  Labs ..........       10   Spot check work and overall

  lab effort.  Sessions graded                            0-

  -1 for quality of deliverable and/or observed effort.

  Labs must be completed on time for credit.

  Projects.........    10    Projects should reflect

  careful, independent work to

  

  solve a problem per an assigned specification.

  Assignments.....     10             Attendance required

  for on-time delivery.

  

  Participation........    0.5           Quality of

  contributions to class demonstrates solution

  

  or technique,  provides unique insight to class.

  

  XIX. Detailed Description of Project Final Examination

  (if applicable):  Students will

  

  XX. Schedule of topics to be covered in Course:

  1.     Introduction

  2.     Computer-System Structures

  3.     Operating-System Structures

  4.     Processes

  5.     Threads

  6.     CPU Scheduling

  7.     Process Synchronization

  8.     Deadlocks

  9.     Memory Management

  10.    Virtual Memory

  11.    File-System Interface

  12.    File-System Implementation

  13.    Distributed System Structures

  14.    Distributed File Systems

  15.    Protection

  16.    Security

  
