            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

BURLINGTON COUNTY COLLEGE

COURSE INFORMATION FORM

This form must be completed for all new and modified courses offered for 
credit, including 

experimental courses.

I. Course Prefix and number: e.g. ART101: CIS 158

II. Course Title: Cisco Fundamentals of Wireless LANs

III. Lecture Hrs. 4

V. Prerequisite(s):  CIS 151

VI. Co-Requisite(s):      

    VII. Dr. David Spang, Dean Science, Math, Technology, 609-894-9311 ext. 
1367,  dspangbcc.edu 



X. New Course

XI. Semester and Year Course will first be Offered (or, if a modified 
course, semester and year when 

revised course will first be offered): Spring 2005 (estimated date)

    XII. Relation of Course to Curriculum(s): Elective



XIII. General Education Designator (if course is intended to satisfy a 
general education requirement 

check appropriate designator):   TL  Technological Literacy



XIV. Catalogue Description:   This introductory course to Wireless LANs 
focuses on the design, 

planning, implementation, operation, and troubleshooting of Wireless LANs.  
It covers a 

comprehensive overview of technologies, security, and design best practices 
with particular emphasis 

on hands-on skills.  It prepares students for Cisco Wireless LAN Support 
Specialist certification. 



XV. Course Objectives (Learning Outcomes): 

1. Demonstrate an understanding of wireless radio technologies and 
topologies. 

2.  Describe IEEE 802.11 wireless standards

3.  Configure and install wireless access points, bridges, adapters and 
antennae. 

4.  Understand wireless design, installation, configuration, monitoring and 
maintenance using CLI and 

web-based Device Manager.

5.  Identify wireless security threats and vulnerabilities.

6.  Understand wireless security using MAC filtering, WEP, LEAP, EAP, and 
802.1x technologies. 

7.  Understand proper site survey techniques and safety practices.

8.  Configure monitoring technologies such as Syslog, SNMP and logging.

9.  Demonstrate the ability to troubleshoot wireless installations and 
configurations. 

10.  Understand vertical and horizontal wireless implementations and uses.



XVI. Textbook(s):  Cisco Networking Academy Program Fundamentals of Wireless 
LANs Companion 

Guide 

Cisco Networking Academy Program Fundamentals of Wireless LANs Lab Companion 

Cisco Networking Academy Program Fundamentals of Wireless LANs Engineering 
Journal and 

Workbook

XVII. Other Course Materials to be supplied by Student:  

XVIII. Grading Policy (Number and Weight of Papers, Quizzes, Examinations, 
etc.) 

XIX. Detailed Description of Project Final Examination (if applicable): 

XX. Schedule of topics to be covered in Course: 



1.  Introduction to wireless LANs

2.  Network and 802.11 interface cards

3.  Wireless radio technology

4.  Wireless topologies

5.  Wireless links and bridges

6.  Antennas

7.  Security

8.  Application design 

9.  Site survey

10.  Troubleshooting management, monitoring and diagnostics

11.  Emerging technologies





CIF Entered/Printed:   November 21, 2007
