            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

BURLINGTON COUNTY COLLEGE

COURSE INFORMATION FORM

This form must be completed for all new and modified courses offered for 
credit, including 

experimental courses.

I. Course Prefix and number: e.g. ART101: CIS 101

II. Course Title: Introduction to Computers

III. Lecture Hrs. 3

       

V. Prerequisite(s):  

VI. Co-Requisite(s):      

    VII. Dr. David Spang, Dean Science, Math, Technology, 609-894-9311 ext. 
1367,  dspangbcc.edu 



    X.  Modified Course 



XI. Semester and Year Course will first be Offered (or, if a modified 
course, semester and year when 

revised course will first be offered):  Spring 1999

       XII. Relation of Course to Curriculum(s):  Elective



XIII. General Education Designator (if course is intended to satisfy a 
general education requirement 

check appropriate designator): 



XIV. Catalogue Description:  This course builds computer literacy as 
students (1) examine concepts of 

computer technology and the use of computers in modern business and living 
(2) acquire practical 

operating system and productivity software skills and (3) get an 
introduction to the basics of data 

analysis, problem analysis and programming.

Classes and labs are structured for students with diverse and varied prior 
computer experience to build 

from each students current skill level.  Individual and group learning 
activities will be employed. 

Students will utilize and e-mail account and a web-based on-line learning 
site for the course. 

XV. Course Objectives (Learning Outcomes): 

 As broad objectives, Students:

1.Will be able to employ and discuss applications of computer technology 
typically used in 

business, academic and personal life experiences, measured by

Labs, reports and oral participation based on class work and research.

Regular use of online email, web-based course site, and internet research

2.Will be able to create documents using productivity tools, measured by

Given a simple requirement such as a letter, can independently (or with 
minimal assistance) 

develop a WORD document to provide a computer-based solution.

Given a simple list of items such as a list of expenses, can independently 
(or with minimal 

assistance) develop an EXCEL spreadsheet to provide a computer-based 
solution. 

Given a need to make a class presentation, participates in the preparation 
of a POWERPOINT 

slide set to provide a computer-based solution.

3.Will be able to recognize key computer technology terms and concepts, 
measured by 

Tests, quizzes and oral participation based on readings and lectures.

4.Will achieve introductory coding skills in a high level programming 
language, measured by 

Given a very simple problem, can independently analyze and write, and test a 
procedural 

program to solve.



This course may lead to further study in the area of computer and 
information sciences. 



XVI. Textbook(s): 1.  TECHNOLOGY IN ACTION 3rd Edition

                                   Authors: Evans, Martin, Poatsy

                                  Pearson, Prentice Hall: ISBN 0-13-187886-7



                              2.  Microsoft Office 2003 Illustrated Series - 
Brief 

                                   Microsoft Windows XP Brief Edition

                                    Authors: Hunt and Halvorson.

                                    Thomson Course Technology: ISBN 
1-4188-6040-9 

XVII. Other Course Materials to be supplied by Student: USB 2.0 thumb drive 
, 

   Course Compass online account:   access code included with text sold in 
College Bookstore, or may 

be purchased separately online  approximate cost of 18  



XVIII. Grading Policy (Number and Weight of Papers, Quizzes, Examinations, 
etc.) 

Tests  (2 20)40    2 tests including final exam

Online HW quizzes                    15   Online quizzes on assigned text 
readings to be 

                                                                             
    completed outside of class, prior to due date/time. 

Portfolio:

Word, Excel, Access             Labs graded for completion, quality. 

Analysis/Programming  

Internet                          25   ALL LABS, plus follow-up homework  
via email 

Projects.. 10   Resume Project (5), individ Research Paper (5)    

 Teamed- 2-3 projects   10    Team presentation plus addl activities.

              A significant part of course depends on

             teamed activity requiring attendance

                                                                    

                                        100

 

Participation Extra Credit 5  pts possible

Instructor may award or add to final grade

Demonstrate innovative solution or provide unique insight to class.

Demonstrate significant improvement in subject



XIX. Detailed Description of Project Final Examination (if applicable): 

XX. Schedule of topics to be covered in Course: 

ICOURSE OUTLINE: (summarizes approximate content)



Week 1

Discussion: Information Technology Applications in Organizations, 
Social/Ethical Implications and 

Issues

Course Overview - Discussion of Syllabus, expectations

Lab Rules and expectations

Why Computers Matter to You (Text Chapter 1)

Lab Activities

Sign on to class online account/website  

Send e-mail to instructor with attachments as instructed



Week 2

Discussion: Hardware and Hardware Functions

Looking at Computers and Understanding the Parts (Text Chapter 2)

The History of the PC

Lab Activities:

Windows XP, File Management (Lab Book Windows XP Unit A, B)



Week 3

Discussion:  Telecommunications, Social/Ethical Implications and Issues

Using the Internet (Text Chapter 3)

Internet Search Engines

Lab Activities:

Student Web Activities created by instructor and/or from Text

Intro to WORD (Lab book WORD Unit B)



Week 4

Discussion:  Computer Software

Application Software (Text Chapter 4)

Digital Entertainment

Lab Activities:

Formatting a document (Lab Book Word Unit C)

Introduction to Creating a Resume (handout, project assignment)



Week 5

Discussion: Computer Software

Using System Software (Text Chapter 5)

Lab Activities:

Enhancing a document (Lab Book Word Unit D)

Week 6

Discussion: Information Technology Applications in Organizations

Understanding and Assessing Hardware (Text Chapter 6)

Lab Activities:

Creating a worksheet (Lab Book Excel Unit E)

Week 7

    Discussion: Hardware and Hardware Functions, Information Technology 
Applications in 

Organizations

computer/technology advertisements

Computing Alternatives

Lab Activities:

Using complex formulas, functions, and lists (Lab Book Excel Unit F)



Week 8

Mid Term Exam

Lab Activities

Creating a Chart (Lab Book Excel Unit G)

Teamed survey recap (spreadsheet)



Week 9

Discussion: Computer/Telecommunications Hardware and Hardware Functions

Networking and Security (Text Chapters 7 and 12)

Lab Activities:

Creating a Presentation (Lab Book PowerPoint Unit K)



Week 10

Discussion: Data Management

Databases and Information Systems (Text Chapter 11)

Lab Activities:

Creating a Database (Lab Book Access Unit H)



Week 11

Discussion: Computer/Telecommunications Hardware and Hardware Functions

Mobile Computing (Text Chapter 8)

     Lab Activities:

Database Forms and Reports (Lab Book Access Unit I)



Week 12

Discussion: Computer Software/Programming, Information Technology 
Applications in Organizations 

Software Programming (Text Chapter 10)

Problem Analysis (flow charting)

Lab Activities:

Flow Chart Exercise 



Week 13

Discussion: Computer Software/Programming  

Programming Introduction

Lab Activities:

Programming Lab 1



Week 14

    Course  Final Exam review  

Lab Activities:

Programming Lab 2

Week 15

      Final Exam 
