            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

BURLINGTON COUNTY COLLEGE

COURSE INFORMATION FORM

This form must be completed for all new and modified courses offered for 
credit, including 

experimental courses.

I. Course Prefix and number: e.g. ART101: CIS 136

II. Course Title: Windows Operating Systems I

    III. Lecture Hrs. 4

       

V. Prerequisite(s):  CIS 150 and EET 215

VI. Co-Requisite(s):      

    VII. Dr. David Spang, Dean Science, Math, Technology, 609-894-9311 ext. 
1367,  dspangbcc.edu 



    X. New Course  

    

XI. Semester and Year Course will first be Offered (or, if a modified 
course, semester and year when 

revised course will first be offered): Spring 2005 (estimated date)

    XII. Relation of Course to Curriculum(s):  Elective



XIII. General Education Designator (if course is intended to satisfy a 
general education requirement 

check appropriate designator):  TL  Technological Literacy



XIV. Catalogue Description:  This course is an intermediate level course on 
the installation, 

configuration and support of Microsoft Windows Professional and Server in 
both a desktop and 

network environment with particular emphasis on hands on skills in the 
following areas: implementing 

and supporting Windows Professional in a desktop environment, managing and 
maintaining Windows 

Server, implementing network infrastructure for network hosts and services.

XV. Course Objectives (Learning Outcomes): 

Students will understand the concepts and operation of Microsoft Windows 
Professional and Server, 

Students will be able to configure and troubleshoot Microsoft Windows 
Professional and Server, 

Student will be able to pass associated industry certification exams.

XVI. Textbook(s):  This course will not be offered until 2005. Textbooks 
will be selected based upon 

the current version of Windows in use at that time. 

XVII. Other Course Materials to be supplied by Student:  

XVIII. Grading Policy (Number and Weight of Papers, Quizzes, Examinations, 
etc.) Unit tests 20, 

Written final 50, Labs 10, Hands on Final 20

XIX. Detailed Description of Project Final Examination (if applicable): 

XX. Schedule of topics to be covered in Course: 



CIF Entered/Printed:   November 14, 2007
