BURLINGTON COUNTY COLLEGE

COURSE INFORMATION FORM

This form must be completed, using MS Word, for all new and modified courses 
offered for credit, 

including experimental courses.  (Form expands to allow full details in each 
category.) 

I. Course Prefix and number: CIS 159

II. Course Title: COMPUTER/NETWORK SECURITYecurity

III. Lecture Hrs.4Clinical Hrs.      Credit Hrs. 4

          Studio Hrs.      Lab Hrs. 3Recitation Hrs.      

       

IV. Course Fee: 150.00

V. Prerequisite(s): CIS 101 or permission

VI. Co-Requisite(s):      

VII. Division Dean Approval: Date:      

VIII. IAC Approval:Date:      

IX. VP Approval:Date:      

X. New Course: 0  Modified Course: 0Experimental Course: 1

 (if modified course explain changes and list old course designator and 
number) 

XI. Semester and Year Course will first be Offered (or, if a modified 
course, semester and year when 

revised course will first be offered): Spring 2005

XII. Relation of Course to Curriculum(s): 1 Program requirement

0 General Education requirement

1 Elective

0 Developmental course requirement

XIII. General Education Designator (if course is intended to satisfy a 
general education requirement 

check appropriate designator): 

          0 CM  Communications 0 HW  Health and Wellness

          0 HA  Humanities 1 TL  Technological Literacy

          0 SS  Social Sciences 0 DGP  Diversity/Global Perspective

          0 MLS  Mathematics and Laboratory Science

XIV. Catalogue Description: This course provides students with an overview 
of computer and network 

security, provides hnads on experience operating and deploying state of the 
art security equipment and 

covers the objectives of the CompTIA Security certification exam. Topics 
include: general security 

concepts, communication security, infrastructure security, basics of 
cryptography and 

operational/organizational security.

XV. Course Objectives (Learning Outcomes): Students will understand the 
concepts related to 

computer and network security. - Students will be able to operate and deploy 
security equipment. - 

Students will be prepared to tale the CompTIA Security certification Exam.

XVI. Textbook(s): Security Guide to Network Security Fundamentals

XVII. Other Course Materials to be supplied by Student:      

XVIII. Grading Policy (number and weight of papers, quizzes, examinations, 
and rubrics) Unit tests 

30, Labs 30 and Final Exam 40

XIX. Detailed Description of Project Final Examination (if applicable): 

XX. Schedule of topics to be covered in Course: 1. Security Overview, 2. 
Authentication, 3. Attacks 

and Malicious Code, 4. Remote Access, 5. E-mail, 6. Web Security, 7. 
Directory and File Transfer 

Services, 8. Wireless and Instant Messaging, 9. Devices, 10. Media and 
Medium, 11. Network Security 

Topologies, 12. Intrusion Detection, 13. Security Baselines, 14. 
Cryptography, 15. Physical Security, 

16. Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity, 17. Computer Forensics and 
Advanced Topics 

XXI. Schedule lab exercises (if applicable):      
