            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                            COURSE SYLLABUS

                         Camden County College

                          Blackwood, NJ 08012



Course ID:     Computer Studies/Computer Information Systems - CIS-101



Course Name:   Personal Computer Applications



Credits:       3



Prerequisites:      None



Co-requisites:      None



New or Modified:    Modified - Same

(List old course ID, if modified)



Semester  Year Course will First Be Offered or, if modified, semester

 year when revised course will first be offered:   June 2004



Contact Person:  Sr. Bernadette Carlin



Email Address:     bcarlincamdencc.edu



Course Description:

This course is a hands-on introduction to microcomputers in which the

student will become familiar with an operating system, word

processing, spreadsheets, database applications, presentation software

and the Internet.  The course will focus on helping the student

logically plan the processes that are necessary to communicate with

the computer to produce a desired result.  During the semester, the

student will get hands-on experience with the WindowsXP Operating

System, the Microsoft Office2002 Suite (Word, Excel, Access and

PowerPoint), and a web browser to access the Internet/WWW.    It is

recommended that students who lack keyboarding skills acquire them by

taking the one-credit course OST110: Microcomputer Keyboarding.



Outline of Course Objectives:

Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:

1. Define the four basic computer operations: input, processing,

output, and storage

2. Distinguish between data and information.

3. Explain the principal parts of the computer and their use.

4. Identify input devices used with microcomputers

5. Identify output devices, such as display devices, and printers.

6. Identify the various storage media used to save information: hard

 drive, floppy disk, zip disks, optical disks, tape, and miniature

 storage devices.

7. Describe the difference between numeric and character data as it is

sorted in computer

    memory.

8. Explain and discuss the how to purchase, install, and maintain a

 personal computer.

9. Differentiate between system software and application software.

10. Identify popular system software and popular application software.

11.Identify and use the basic features of the Operating System: mouse,

scrolling, test boxes, dialog

     boxes, customize and display tool bars, maximize and minimize

windows, use MyComputer, explore

     help, arrange, change and create icons.

12.  To understand the hierarchy structure of system software through

  windows explorer.

13.  To manage files and folders: create, rename, copy, move, find

properties, save, and delete.

14.  To find and use the accessories: calendar, notepad, WordPad,

paint, imaging, calculator and system tools.

15.  Discuss computer communication channels and equipment, the

Internet, and the World Wide Web

16. Differentiate between a local area network and a wide area

network.

17. Define e-commerce.

18. Describe the history of the Internet.

19. Explain the uses and popularity of the Internet/WWW.

20. Use a web browser to access the Internet/WWW.

21. Select and use Internet search engines to access information.

22. Communicate via the Internet using e-mail.

23. Use Web Advisor to access College and student information online.

24. Identify and use the common features of a word processor

application and demonstrate the

      ability to apply the concepts learned in creating and editing

documents.

25. Identify and use the common features of a spreadsheet application

and demonstrate the

      ability to apply the concepts learned in creating and updating

electronic worksheets.

26. Identify and use the common features of a relational database

management system

      application and demonstrate the ability to apply the concepts

learned in creating tables,

      forms, reports and queries for database.

27. Describe how data is organized in relational databases in terms of

characters, fields,

      records, and tables.

28. Identify and use the common features of presentation software and

demonstrate the ability

      to apply the concepts learned in creating and updating

presentations.





Course Materials:

     Textbook(s):  If textbook is required, the titles will be

assigned first day of class.



Grade Determinants:

The student will be evaluated on the degree to which student learning

outcomes are achieved.  A variety of methods may be used such as

tests, class participation, projects, homework assignments, etc.

A   90-100

B   80-89

C   70-79

D     60-69

F   below 60

I   Incomplete (only given under extreme emergencies)

NA    Not Attending

XA    Never Attended

W   Withdrawal



Schedule of Topics to be covered:

Course Outline:

  I  Introduction to Computers

     A. Define the term computer

  B. Define four basic computer operations

  C. Differentiate between data and information

  D. Identify the primary components of a computer

      1. Input devices: keyboard, mouse, digital camera, scanner,

  microphone, etc

      2. Processor (control unit and Arithmetic logic unit)

      3. Memory (ROM and RAM)

      4. Output devices: display devices (CRT and LCD) and printers

  (impact and

          nonimpact)

      5. Storage devices: hard drive, floppy disks, zip disks,

  optical disks, tape, miniature

          storage devices

      6. Communication devices: modem and transmission media

  II. Systems software - Windows

    A. Exploring the basics:

       1. Start Windows

       2. Explore the Desktop

       3. Use toolbars

       4. Manipulate Windows

       5. Use Dialog boxes

      B. File management

            1. Use Windows Explorer

             2. Organize files and folders

             3. Create, move, copy, name, rename delete files and

  folders

  

  III. Internet

     A.  Internet and World Wide Web

       1.   Examine Home Pages and Web Browers

2.   Use Universal Resource Locators

3.   Navigate through links

4.   Discuss the History list and the favorite feature

5.   Present Email using hotmail or yahoo

6.   Develop skill in using Search engines

     B.   Web Advisor

       1.   Search for classes

2.   View grades

3.   Check schedules

4.   Register for classes

5.   Access other important information about their records at Camden

County College.

6.   Make payment with a credit card

7.   Check account balances

8.   Review financial aid file and award

  IV. Application Software: Basic Tools

    A. Using Commercial Off the Shelf Software

     B. Common GUIs for application packages

       C. Word Processing

       D. Spreadsheets

       E. Database

       F. Presentation Graphics

       G. Communications

       H. Integrated Software

  V. Word Processing

      A. Creating a Document

      B. Text formatting

      C. Word wrap

      D. Cut, copy, and paste features

      E. Tools

           1. Search and replace

           2. Spell Checking

           3. Thesaurus

      F. Table of Contents

      G. Headers and Footers

      H. Word Art

      I.  Graphics

      J.   Making an outline

      K.   Embedding a Table

  VI. Spreadsheets

        A. Features of Spreadsheet Applications

        B. Creating, Saving, Retrieving worksheets

        C. Using Functions

        D. Creating Formulas

     E. Using the What-If Analysis

        E. Copying, auto copying

        F. Using Frames

        G. Using Charts and Graphics

        H. Creating Reports

  VII. Files and Database

         A. Files

             1. Organization

             2. Relational Files-- Tables

             3. Key Fields

        B Features of Database

        C Relational Database Management Systems Software

  VIII. Using Relational Database Software

          A. Features of software

          B. Creating, Updating Database

          C. Creating Forms

          D. Creating Table Structures

          E. Queries

          F. Reports

  IX. Presentation Software

   A.   Navigating through an existing presentation

B.   Creating a Presentation

C.   Modifying a Presentation

   D.  Applying Graphics



Course Activities:

Classroom activities will include formal and informal lectures and

labs.  During the lectures new material will be presented and

explained.  Demonstrations will also be provided.  Students are

expected to contribute to the discussion and to ask questions about

the material.  There will be hands-on lab sessions that will flow

from the lecture material.  Students will be assigned computer

projects and readings to be completed in-class and outside of class.
