            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



                                

                         Course Syllabus

                      Camden County College

                      Blackwood, New Jersey



Course ID:                    Computer Information Systems - CIS

108



Course Name:             Construction Management Computer Basics



Credits:                 3



Prerequisites:                None

Co-requisites:                None



Indicate if New or Modified Course:   New Course - March 2006



Contact Person:               Charles VanMater -

cvanmatercamdencc.edu



Course Description:

This course provides a foundation in computer and computer-

related skills necessary to manage a construction project.

Planning and scheduling software will be used.  Applications in

budgeting using spreadsheet software and technical writing using

word processing software will be emphasized.  Planning,

scheduling and maintenance of the project life cycle are the

primary focuses.  Techniques for planning and operating the

project will include the identification, ordering and tracking of

resources, assigning controls and creating structures.



Outline of Course Objectives:

Using the Internet, students will be able to:

Email with attachments

Conduct searches.

Track orders



Using word processing software, students will be able to:

Format a letter or memorandum.

Create a report.

Complete pre-printed forms and documents.

Use spelling and grammar functions.

Create Tables

Using presentation software

Introduction to Common User Interface

Creating a Presentation

Using spreadsheet software, students will be able to:

Plan, build, test and document a worksheet.

Enter labels, values and formulae.

Use basic worksheet functions for accumulating, averaging, and

displaying the data.

Plan and construct charts based on data from a worksheet.

Use a worksheet to examine what if alternatives.

Create Graphs



Using project management software, students will be able to:

Starting the Project

Researching the Project

Working with Management

Creating the Budget

Creating a Work Breakdown Structure

Organizing a Project Team

Building the Project Plan

Revising the Project Plan



Course Materials:

     Textbook(s):

     IT Project Management on Track from Start to Finish,

     Joseph Phillips, McGraw-Hill

     

Grade Determinants:

The student will be evaluated on the degree to which student

learning outcomes are achieved.  A variety of methods may be used

such as tests, class participation, projects, homework

assignments, etc.



Schedule of Topics to be Covered:

Project Planning and Scheduling

Planning Job Activities

Updating the Schedule

Tracking and Reporting Project Costs

Monitoring the Project Schedule

Changed Conditions

Electronic Record Keeping

Technical Reports

Diaries and Daily Reports

Construction Photographs

Using Computers for Project Administration

Web-Enabled Project Management Applications



Course Activities:

Course activities will include lecture and discussion of new and

previously discussed material, research on the part of students,

authentic exercises using the computer, and problem-solving group

activities.  Students will be encouraged to participate in

discussions and to ask questions or volunteer information when

pertinent to the topic under discussion. A group-based project

management project will be assigned.



Simulation activities:  Students are construction managers of a

various-sized construction projects with multiple opportunities

for using technology.  Projects are analyzed for the appropriate

application of technology.

Writing assignments:  students will analyze current issues in the

field of construction management using current articles from

database searches.

Case Studies:  Complex situations and scenarios will be analyzed

in cooperative group settings.

Lectures:  This format will include question and answer sessions

to provide interactivity between students and instructor.
