            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                            COURSE SYLLABUS

                         Camden County College

                          Blackwood, NJ 08012



Course ID:     Computer Science - CSC-111



Course Name:   Introduction to Programming



Credits:       3



Prerequisites:      Standard keyboard familiarity is recommended

Co-requisites:      None



New or Modified:    Modified, Same



Semester  Year Course will First Be Offered or, if modified, semester

 year when revised course will first be offered:  Fall 2005



Contact Person:     Rosemary Boiano



Email Address:      rboianocamdencc.edu



Course Description:

This course is designed to introduce students to the object oriented

programming terms: class, object, properties and methods by utilizing

the software development tool, Microsoft Visual Basic .Net.  Topics

covered will include the Microsoft Visual Basic .Net environment,

debugging, data types and variables, control structures, multiple

forms, menus, printing, an elementary introduction to arrays, graphics

and drawing using lines and geometric shapes.



Outline of Course Objectives:

Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:

1. Start a new project or open an existing project in Microsoft Visual

Basic.Net.

2. Define the object oriented programming terms: class, object,

properties and methods.

3. Use Microsoft Visual Basic .Net given classes to create objects,

view and modify properties of those objects and demonstrate the use of

methods.

4. Create, save, load and run Visual Basic .Net projects within the

VB.Net environment.

5. Use several of the powerful Visual Basic .Net debugging tools. For

example, the ability to step through the lines of code one line at a

time and to track the contents assigned to properties and variables

using the mouse pointer.

6. Declare constants and variables utilizing data types such as

integer, decimal, single, double, string and Boolean.

7. Write Basic code within procedures (subprograms and functions),

which include control structures for decision-making and repetition.

8. Create a project demonstrating the use of multiple forms and menus.

9. Print on paper the code found in the coding window.

10. Print reports generated by the project code on paper.

11. Declare, store data, access elements and perform calculations with

the contents of a one-dimensional array.

12. Explain the coordinate system used to position graphical objects

on a form.

13. Draw lines, boxes, rectangles, circles, ellipses and polygons in

order to create images on a form.





Course Materials:



     Textbook(s):



     Supplemental Materials:



Grade Determinants:

The student will be evaluated on the degree to which student learning

outcomes are achieved.  A variety of methods may be used such as

tests, class participation, projects, homework assignments, etc.

(There must be some evidence that the learning outcomes have been

achieve.)





Schedule of Topics to be covered:

I. Your First Microsoft Visual Basic .Net Program

   A. A First Look at Microsoft Visual Basic .Net

   B. Forms, Controls and Properties

   C. Events and Code



II. Calculations and Data

   A. Mathematical Operators

   B. Exponentiation, Order of Operations and Error Handling

   C. Data Types and Variables

   D. Strings and Decimal Types



III. Decision Making

   A. If Statements

   B. Nested If Statements and Radio Buttons



IV. Loops, Multiple Forms, Menus, and Printing

   A. Do Loops

   B. List Boxes, For Next Loops

   C. Arrays



V. Multiple Forms, Menus and Printing

   A. Multiple Forms

   B. Menus and Printing



VI. Graphics and Drawing

   A. Lines and Shapes

   B. Case Study - The Snake Game



Course Activities:

The classroom activities will include formal and informal lectures

where new material and assigned problems will be explained. Students

will have the opportunity to contribute to the discussion and to ask

questions about the material. Hands-On work on the computer will be

done during class and outside of the regularly scheduled classroom

hours.
