            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                            COURSE SYLLABUS

                         Camden County College

                          Blackwood, NJ 08012



Course ID:     Computer Science - CSC-103



Course Name:   Elements of Computer Science



Credits:       3



Prerequisites:      None



Co-requisites:      None



New or Modified:    NEW

(List old course ID, if modified)



Semester  Year Course will First Be Offered or, if modified, semester

 year when revised course will first be offered:  Fall 2005



Contact Person:     Rosemary Boiano



Email Address:      rboianocamdencc.edu



Course Description:

This course is designed as a survey of introductory topics in computer

science.  These topics include operating systems, Windows XP and file

management, hardware devices, number systems and internal

representation of data, careers in the computer field and examples of

educational programs designed for preparation for these careers, job

searches, and an introduction to computer programming languages using

hands-on experiences with an object oriented programming language.



Outline of Course Objectives:

Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:

1. Name three operating systems and some of their characteristics and

functionality.

2. Start Windows, run programs and access the help feature.

3. Manage files and folders in Windows XP.

4. Customize the taskbar and desktop and create shortcuts in Windows

XP.

5. Manage printers in Windows XP.

6. List and compare eight input devices.

7. Define and describe four types of pointing devices including

wireless and optical technology.

8. Compare and contrast inkjet and laser printers.

9. Describe three classes of CDs and three classes of DVDs and 3 types

of disk storage media.

10. List and describe five types of flash memory cards.

11. Name and describe four types of monitors.

12. Perform mathematical conversions between binary, decimal and

hexadecimal number systems.

13. Perform mathematical operations in binary.

14. Show the storage representation of numbers stored in twos

complement.

15. Show the storage representation of integers, long integers, single

precision real numbers, double precision real numbers, and character

(string) representation in ANSI or ASCII code.

16. Name ten careers in the computer field.

17. Write a job description for at least one career in the computer

field.

18. Use a computer to perform a job search for at least one career in

the computer field.

19. Use a computer to locate and print US Department of Labor and NJ

Department of Labor statistics on job opportunities on at least one

career in the computer field.

20. Use a computer to locate and print selected academic programs,

certificates and course descriptions on the Camden County College

website.

21. Compare and contrast computer training in Camden County Colleges

Continuing Education with credit bearing associate degrees and

certificates.  Note: costs, time commitment, outcomes, long term

effects, etc.

22. Name five Microsoft Certifications and explain their significance.

Note: This is found on the Microsoft Website.

23. Compare and contrast requirements for certificates and associate

degrees as well as the difference between AA, AS, and AAS degrees.

24. Use a computer to locate and print out the requirements for a

bachelors degree in a computer field at Rowan U., Rutgers U. -

Camden, Thomas Edison State College, or any college or university of

choice.

25. Write the steps in program development and explain their meaning.

26. State the difference between compilers and interpreters.

27. Complete a programming project in Visual BASIC. Net and one in

Alice.

28. Write definitions for the terms object oriented programming,

objects, methods,  properties, classes and inheritance.



Course Materials:

     Textbook(s):

     Computing Concepts, 2nd edition, by Stephen Haag, Maeve Cummings,

     and Alan Rea, Jr.  McGraw-Hill    (2004).

     Microsoft Windows XP,  by Stephen Haag and James Perry McGraw-

Hill (2004).



     Supplemental Materials:

     Floppy disk(s) or zip disk



Grade Determinants:

     A - 90 to 100       B - 80 to 89

     C - 70 to 79        D - 60 to 69

     F - Below 60

     I - Incomplete (Only under emergencies) Must be completed within

one semester

     NA - Not Attending

     XA- Never Attended

     W - Withdraw (Be sure to go to the registrars office. This is an

     administrative grade and cannot be assigned by a faculty member.)



Number of Papers  Examinations:

The student will be evaluated on the degree to which student learning

outcomes are achieved.  A variety of methods may be used such as

tests, class participation, projects, homework assignments, etc.  For

this course there will be three or four in-class tests and three or

four major projects (programs) that will be collected and graded.

Schedule of Topics to be covered:

  I. Operating Systems

        A. Operating Systems: Characteristics and Functionality

        B. Windows XP

        C. File Management in Windows XP



    II.  Hardware

        A. Input Devices

        B. Output Devices

        C. Storage Devices

        D. Computer Architecture

          1. CPU and RAM

          2. Connectives and Ports

          3. Expansion Cards

          4. Buses



    III. Internal Representation

        A. Number Systems

          1. Binary

          2. Hexadecimal

        B. Conversions between Number Systems

          1. Binary and decimal

          2. Binary and Hexadecimal

        C. Mathematical Operations in Binary

        D. Twos Complement

        E. Data Types and Internal Representation

          1. Variables

          2. Integers

          3. Long Integers

          4. Single Precision Real Numbers

          5. Double Precision Real Numbers

          6. Character Representation in ANSI Code  (ASCII Code)

        F. Logical Operations with And, Or and Not (Truth Tables)



    IV. Careers in the Computer Field

        A. Job Titles and Job Descriptions

        B. Educational Programs and Requirements

          1. Introduction to the Camden County College Web Site

          2. Searching the CCC Web Site

          3. Certificates and Degrees at Camden County College

(computers)

          4. Degrees in the computing field at four-year colleges and

universities.

          5. Continuing Education at Camden County College

          6. Microsoft Certificates

     C. Job Searches Using Popular Web Sites



     V. Computer Programming Languages

        A. The Meaning of Problem Solving

        A. Program Development and Logic

          1. Investigation, Analysis, Design

          2. Pseudocode, Algorithms, Flowcharts, Story Boards,

Hierarchy Charts

        B. Syntax and Language Environments

          1. Coding

          2. Control Structures

          3. Typing

        C. Testing, Implementing and Maintaining Software

          1. Debugging

          2. Tracing

        D. Compilers and Interpreters

        E. Events

          Hands-On With Visual BASIC. Net

        F. Object-Oriented Programming

          Hands-On with Alice  (or Java or C)



Course Activities:

Class presentations may include formal and informal lectures, videos,

demonstrations,

and hands-on work on the computer, which will enhance an

understanding of the topic

being studied.   Students will have the opportunity to contribute to

the discussion and

to ask questions about the material.



     
