            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



                         CAMDEN COUNTY COLLEGE

                         Blackwood, New Jersey

                            Course Syllabus





Course ID:          Computer Studies/Computer Science

Course Name:   Fundamentals of Programming - CSC 100

Credits:       4

Prerequisites:      None

Co-requisites:      None

Course:        New

Offered:       Fall 2003

Contact Person:     William Taylor

Email address: wtaylorcamdencc.edu



Course Description/Goals:

This is an introductory Computer Science course in which students will

learn the fundamentals of object-oriented programming in a 3-

dimensional, interactive, animation environment.  Students will create

animation projects using a special software package for creating

animation in small virtual worlds using 3-dimensional models.

Students will obtain a strong core of fundamental programming concepts

and problem solving techniques, providing a basis for further study in

a variety of computer related fields.



Course Objectives/Student Learning Outcomes:

Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:

     1.   Create objects and place them in the context of a virtual world.

2.   Define classes.

3.   Explain object properties.

4.   Explain object behaviors.

5.   Describe relationships between objects.

6.   Perform decision-making using if.

7.   Perform statements repetitively.

8.   Define methods.

9.   Explore the fundamental stages of software development.

10.  Explain the flow of control through a program.

11.  Perform mathematical operations.

12.  Implement nested control structures.

13.  Pass parameters to methods.

14.  Define and use arrays for basic data organization.

15.  Explain the life cycle of a software system.

16.  Contrast linear and iterative development approaches.

17.  Explore the goals and techniques of testing.

18.  Explain the underlying concepts of recursion.

19.  Examine recursive methods.

20.  Demonstrate the use of recursion to solve problems.

21.  Explain basic sorting technique.

22.  Create simulations.

23.  Create and describe composite objects.

  





Course Materials:

     Textbook(s):   To be determined

     Supplemental Materials:



Student Evaluation:

The student will be evaluated on the degree to which student learning

outcomes are achieved.  A variety of methods may be used such as

tests, class participation, projects, homework assignments, etc.



Course Outline:

Getting Started

       o    Why Alice

o    An Alice World (Demo)

o    Using The Alice Interface

o    How To Run An Alice World

o    How To Create An Initial Scene

o    How To Write  Test A Script

o    Types of Animations

                DoInOrder vs. DoTogether

    Movie vs. Interactive

  1.   Classes and Objects in a Virtual World

       o    Object Properties

o    Object Parts

o    Object Actions

o    Motion -- Object Motion

o    A Comparison of Motion: Mouse vs. Methods

  2.   Animations

       o    Scenarios, Tasks, and Problem Solving Concepts

o    Responses

o    Details of Syntax

o    Errors, Errors, Errors, Errors

  3.   Powerful motion techniques

       o    Decision: If Statements

o    Repetitions: Loops

o    Functions

  4.   Recursion

       o    Location Coordinates

o    Random Number Generation

o    Recursive Function Call

  5.   Composite Objects Revisited







  6.   Putting it all together

       o    A List of Objects

o    Sorting Objects (by color, height, )

o    Simulations

                Maze

    Puzzle Pieces

    Towers of Hanoi

  7.   Project

       o    Commercial

o    Game



Course Activities:

The classroom activities will include formal and informal lectures

where new material and assigned problems will be explained.  Students

will have the opportunity to contribute to the discussion and to ask

questions about the material.  Hands-on computer activities will take

place to reinforce concepts presented during the lecture.  Projects

are assigned to be completed inside and outside of the regularly

scheduled class time.
