            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.





                            Course Syllabus

                         Camden County College

                         Blackwood, New Jersey



Course ID:          Computer Science - CSC 120



Course Name:   Programming for New Media



Credits:       4



Prerequisites:      None



Co-requisites:      None



New Course:         April 2006



Contact Person:     William Taylor  wtaylorcamdencc.edu



Course Description/Goals:

This is an introductory Computer Science course in which students will

learn the fundamentals of object-oriented programming in a 3-

dimensional, interactive, animation environment.  The course will also

present Java programming in a context that students find relevant and

useful. Students learn to program using Java while creating

interesting effects with sounds, pictures, web pages, and video.

Students will obtain a strong core of fundamental programming concepts

and problem-solving techniques, providing a basis for further study in

a variety of computer related fields.



Course Objectives/Student Learning Outcomes:

  Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:

     1.   Create objects and place them in the context of a virtual world.

2.   Define classes.

3.   Explain object properties.

4.   Explain object behaviors.

5.   Describe relationships between objects.

6.   Perform decision-making using if statements.

7.   Perform statements repetitively.

8.   Define methods.

9.   Explore the fundamental stages of software development.

10.  Explain the flow of control through a program.

11.  Perform mathematical operations.

12.  Implement nested control structures.

13.  Pass parameters to methods.

14.  Define and use arrays for basic data organization.

15.  Explain the life cycle of a software system.

16.  Contrast linear and iterative development approaches.

17.  Explore the goals and techniques of testing.

18.  Explain the underlying concepts of recursion.

19.  Examine recursive methods.

20.  Demonstrate the use of recursion to solve problems.

21.  Explain basic sorting technique.

22.  Create simulations.

23.  Create and describe composite objects.

24.  Modify pictures using loops.

25.  Modify pixels in a matrix.

26.  Modify samples in a sound.

27.  Combine and create sounds

28.  Create and modify text.

29.  Make text for the web.

30.  Encode, manipulate, and create movies



Course Materials:

     Textbook(s):   Learning to Program with Alice Dann, Cooper,

Pausch

               Pearson Prentice Hall



               Introduction to Computing and Programming with Java - A

               Multimedia Approach

               Mark Guzdial, Barbara Ericson, Pearson Prentice Hall



Student Evaluation:

The student will be evaluated on the degree to which student learning

outcomes are achieved.  A variety of methods may be used such as

tests, class participation, projects, homework assignments, etc.



Course Outline:

  1.   Getting Started

       o    Introduction to Alice

o    Alice Concepts

  2.   Program Design and Implementation

       o    Scenarios and Storyboards

o    First Alice programs

o    Orientation and Movement Instructions

  3.   Programming

       o    Built-in Functions and Expressions

o    Simple Control Structures

o    Engineering Look and Feel

  4.   Classes, Objects, Methods, and Parameters

       o    World Level Methods

o    Parameters

o    Class Level Methods and Inheritance

  5.   Interaction:  Events and Event Handling

       o    Interactive Programming

o    Parameters and Event Handling Methods

o    Events

  6.   Functions and Conditional Execution

       o    Functions

o    Execution Control with if/else

o    Boolean Functions

o    Random Motion

o    Random Number Generation

  7.   Repetition:  Definite and Indefinite

       o    Loops

o    While (Indefinite Loops)

o    Events and Repetition

  8.   Recursion

       o    Introduction to Recursion

o    Additional Recursive Solutions

o    Camera and Animation Controls

  9.   Lists and List Processing

       o    Lists

o    List Search

o    Poses

  10.  Variables and Inheritance

       o    Variables

o    Array Visualization

o    Debugging Using a Watch

  11.  Introduction to Java

12.  Modifying Pictures

       o    Modifying Pixels

o    Drawing

  13.  Sound

       o    Modifying all Samples in a Sound

o    Modifying Samples using Ranges

o    Combining and Creating Sounds

  14.  Creating and Modifying Text

15.  Encoding, Manipulating and Creating Movies

Course Activities:

The classroom activities will include formal and informal lectures

where new material and assigned problems will be explained.  Students

will have the opportunity to contribute to the discussion and to ask

questions about the material.  Hands-on computer activities will take

place to reinforce concepts presented during the lecture.  Projects

are assigned to be completed inside and outside of the regularly

scheduled class time.
