            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                            COURSE SYLLABUS

                         Camden County College

                          Blackwood, NJ 08012



Course ID:          Computer Integrated Manufacturing Engineering

Technology - CIM-211

Course Name:   PLC Programming



Credits:       4



Prerequisites:      Electrical and Electronic Principles (EET-101)



Co-requisites:      None



New or Modified:    Modified, Same

(List old course ID, if modified)



Semester  Year Course will First Be Offered or, if modified, semester

 year when revised course will first be offered: January 2005



Contact Person:     Prof. Melvin Roberts



Email Address:      mrobertscamdencc.edu



Course Description:

No investigation of the modern industrial environment would be

complete without the study of the Programmable Logic Controller (PLC)

and its associated programming language, Relay Ladder Logic (RLL).

This course is designed to achieve these ends. This course will

explore the history, theory and operation of the PLC. It will include

wiring the PLC to real-world devices. It will cover those features

common to all PLCs and briefly discuss those features offered on high-

end machines. Both the capabilities and the limitations of the PLC

will be discussed.



The PLC used will be the Allen-Bradley SLC-500/02 processors. The

programming environment will be Windows using the RSLogix Programming

Package.



Outline of Course Objectives:

Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:

Design, read, write, edit and troubleshoot PLC programs for the Allen-

Bradley SLC 500 PLC

RSLogix software. The student will be able to install and troubleshoot

field wiring to PLCs. The student will be able to converse in the PLC

language, Relay Ladder Logic, by using mnemonics. The student will

also be able to select the proper PLC to use on the job based on the

number of I/O, the scan time, and the number of auxiliary devices such

as Timers and Counters. The student will have also become familiar

with what is the programming interface used by probably 95 of PLCs

today, the IBM PC and its work-a-likes. The student will have gained

familiarity with both DOS and the Windows programming environments.



Course Materials:

     Textbook:  Petruzella, Frank D. W, Programmable Logic

Controllers, latest edition,

                               New York: Glencoe/McGraw-Hill, NY



                       Supplemental Materials: A couple of 3  high-

                       density floppy disks should be purchased by

                       the student for program storage and tutorial

                       distribution.



Grade Determinants:

The student will be evaluated using a variety of methods such as

tests, laboratory assignments and final exam.



Schedule of Topics to be covered:

Numbering Systems                       PLC Scan Time and Scan Logic

Pattern

Gates                                   Number Conversion

Boolean Algebra                         PLC Devices Including:

Computer/PLC Architecture                         Timers

Ladder Diagrams                              Counters

Common I/O Devices                           Internal Relays

I/O Device Interfacing                       Relational Operators

Complex Logic Circuits                       Latch/Unlatch Coils

PLC Memory Mapping

Subroutines (time permitting)



Course Activities: Lecture and lab activities with hands-on emphasis.
