            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



Mathematics 121

Applied Finite Mathematics

Credits:   3

Prerequisite:       Reading Skills III (ENG-013),

             Intermediate Algebra-Extended (MTH-109) OR

           Pre-Calculus I (MTH-120) OR

             Proper Placement Exam score.

New Course:  Spring 2004



Pablo Echeverria

Chairperson, Mathematics

(856) 227-7200 x4205

pecheverriacamdencc.edu



Course Description/Goals:

This course is designed to introduce computer studies, business,

and liberal arts students to topics beyond the level of

Intermediate Algebra.  This course was developed to be a

transferable mathematics course to many institutions, but it will

not transfer unless the receiving school has a similar course for

credit.  Topics to be covered include solving systems of linear

equations, basic matrix operations, solving linear programming

problems using the graphical method and the simplex method, sets,

counting techniques including permutations and combinations,

probability, and introduction to descriptive statistics and

normal distributions.



Course Objective/Student Learning Outcomes:



Unit I:  Systems of Linear Equations and Matrices

Students will be able to:

 1.  Solve a system of two linear equations with two variables by

the elimination method.

 2.  Solve of n equations in n unknowns by the Gauss-Jordan

Method using pencil and paper.

 3.  Solve a system of n equations in n unknowns using a graphing

     calculator or an appropriate software package.

 4.  Translate a given word application problem into a set of n

equations in n unknowns.

 5.  Add and subtract two m by n matrices.

 6.  Multiply a matrix by a scalar.

 7.  Multiply two matrices (if possible) by hand.

 8.  Multiply two matrices (if possible) by using a graphing

     calculator or an appropriate software package.

 9.  Determine when two matrices cannot be added, subtracted or

multiplied.

10.  Find the inverse of a square matrix by hand.

11.  Find the inverse of a square matrix by using a graphing

     calculator or an appropriate software package.

12.       Determine when a square matrix does not have an

inverse.

13   Verify that two matrices are inverses of each other.

14.  Solve a system of n equations in n unknowns by using the

inverse matrix technique.

15.  Set up a matrix equation that will solve an application

problem.

Unit II:  Linear Programming by the Graphical Method and the

Simplex Method

Students will be able to:

 1.  Graph linear inequalities.

 2.  Graph a set of constraints (linear inequalities) for a

     linear programming problem on the same set of axis.

 3.  Identify the region of intersection of a set of constraints

     (inequalities) by shading this region that is called the

     feasible region for the linear programming problem.

 4.  Determine if the feasible region for a given linear

     programming problem is bounded or unbounded.

 5.  Find by some algebraic method the coordinates of all corner

     points of the feasible region for a given linear programming

     problem

 6.  Substitute the coordinate values (x,y) of corner points into

     an objective function of a given linear programming problem.

 7.  Determine the maximum and/or minimum value(s) generated by

     an objective function by comparison of the calculated

     values.

 8.  Construct the set of constraints and the objective function

     which will solve a given maximizing or minimizing linear

     programming word problem by the Method of Corners.

 9.  Identify a linear programming problem which is in standard

     maximum form.

10.  Convert a constraint of a linear programming problem in

     standard maximum form    into a linear equation by

     introducing a slack variable.

11.  Convert the objective function of a linear programming

     problem in standard maximum form to one where all variables are

     on the left and 0 is on the right.

12.  Set up the initial simplex tableau for a linear programming

     problem.

13.  Read the solution from any given tableau of linear

     programming problem being solved by the simplex method.

14.  Identify the basic and non-basic variables in any given

     tableau of a linear programming problem being solved by the

     simplex method.

15.  Identify the pivot element.

16.  Perform a complete pivot operation.

17.  Determine whether or not the optimum solution has been found

     by checking to see that all indicators are positive or 0.

     If not, continue to perform the pivot operation until the

     optimum solution is found (if it exists).

18.  State the optimum solution determined by the simplex method.

19.  Construct the set of constraints and the objective function

     which will solve a given maximization application problem by

     the simplex method.

20.  Solve a linear programming standard minimization problem by

     the simplex method.

21.  Convert a constraint with a greater than or equal sign into

     an equation by subtracting a surplus variable.

22.  Solve a linear programming problem with mixed constraints.

23.  Convert the objective function of a minimizing problem into

     a maximum objective function.

24.  Determine and state the final solution from the terminal

     simplex tableau for a minimization problem.

25.  Construct the set of constraints and the objective function

     which will solve a given minimization problem by the simplex

     method.

26.  Convert a constraint, which is an equality to one that can

     be used with the simplex method by adding an artificial

     variable.

27.  Solve a maximizing or minimizing linear programming problem

     with the simplex method if it contains a constraint with an

     equal sign.

28.  Construct the set of constraints and the objective function,

     which will solve a given maximizing or minimizing linear,

     programming word problem by the simplex method.

Unit III:  Sets

Students will be able to:

 1.  Identify the following set symbols:  and use them correctly

     when given specific sets.

 2.  Decide whether or not a set is well defined.

 3.  List the elements of a set when given a description of the

set.

 4.  Define a set in set builder notation when given a list or

     description of the elements of the set.

 5.  Find the cardinal number of a set.

 6.  Perform operations on sets and list the elements of the

answer in set notation.

 7.  Draw the Venn diagram that illustrates a given region of an

expression involving sets.

 8.  Ascertain whether or not a given set equality is true or

     false by drawing appropriate Venn diagram.

 9.  Represent the given data of a marketing/survey problem with

     a Venn diagram and answer associated questions from the Venn

     diagram.

10.  Lists the subsets of a given set.

11.  Calculate the number of subsets of a given set with n

elements by finding .

12.  Decide whether or not a given set is a subset of another

set.

13.  State that the empty set is a subset of all sets.

14.  Use the fundamental principle of counting to determine the

     distinct number of ways 2 or more events can occur.

15.  Find n for  (n an integer).

16.  Find the number of permutations that can be made from n

     things taken r at a time.

17.  Find the number of combinations that can be made from n

     things taken r at a time.

18.  Distinguish between problems that are permutations,

     combinations, and/or problems that involve both concepts.

19.  Solve problems that require the use of permutations,

     combinations, and/or problems that involve both concepts.

20.  Set up the numerical expressions that will solve at least

     and at most types of combinations.

21.  Define the following terms: experiment, trial, outcomes,

     sample space, simple event, event, certain event and

     impossible event.

22.  State the basic formula for probability.

23.  State and use the following facts where given a sample space

     which is the union of n distinct simple events   with associated

     probabilities

       then:

          a.

          b.

          c.   P(S)  1

          d.

24.  Write the sample space for an experiment.

25.  Calculate the probabilities of events using the probability

     formula.

26.  State the following facts about events E and F from sample

     space S.

          a.   EF occurs when both E and F occur

          b.   EF occurs when E or F occur

          c.    occurs when E does not occur

          d.   E and F are mutually exclusive if E F 

27.  Solve problems by using the Addition Rule (union rule).

28.  Solve problems by using the Rule of Complements.

29.  Solve probability problems using methods of counting.

30.  Solve conditional probability problems by examining the

     reduced sample space and/or the conditional probability

     formula.

31.  Solve probability problems using the Product Rule.

32.  Determine if two events are mutually independent by using

     the Test for Independence.

Unit IV:  Probability Distributions and Statistics

 Students will be able to:

 1.  Define random variable.

 2.  Find the probability distribution of a random variable.

 3.  Construct an ungrouped frequency distribution table.

 4.  Construct a grouped frequency distribution.

 5.  Construct a histogram for both grouped and ungrouped

frequency distributions.

 6.  Construct a frequency polygon.

 7.  Calculate the mean for grouped and ungrouped data.

 8.  Find the mean for ungrouped data.

 9.  Find the mode(s) for ungrouped data.

10.  Find the expected value of a random variable X.

11.  Find the odds in favor of or against an event.

12.  Find the probability of an event given the odds.

13.  Calculate the variance of a random variable X.

14.  Calculate the standard deviation of a random variable X.

15.  Determine whether or not a given experiment is a binomial

experiment.

16.  Compute probabilities in a binomial experiment.

17.  Calculate the mean, variance and standard deviation of a

binomial random variable X.

18.  State the area under the normal curve is 1.

19.  State the Empirical Rule.

20.  Establish whether or not the raw data is approximately

     normally distributed about the mean.

Given the information that a given set of data is approximately

normally distributed about the mean.  The student will be able

to:

21.  Use a z-table to find the area under the normal curve for

specific values.

22.  Find a z-score.

23.  Find the probability P(X) of a random variable X given the

standard deviation and mean.

24.  Solve an assortment of word problems when given standard

     deviation, mean and specific scores.



Course Outline:

Unit I:  Systems of Linear Equations and Matrices

          2-1  Systems of Linear Equations - Introduction

          2-2  Solving Systems of Linear Equations I

          2-3  Solving Systems of Linear Equations II

          2-4  Matrices

          2-5  Multiplication of Matrices

          2-6  The Inverse of a Square Matrix

Unit II:  Linear Programming by the Graphical Method and the

Simplex Method

          3-1  Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two

Variables

          3-2  Linear Programming Problems

          3-3  Graphical Solution of Linear Programming Problems

          4-1  The Simplex Method:  Standard Maximization

Problems

          4-2  The Simplex Method:  Standard Minimization

Problems

          4-3  The Simplex Method:  Nonstandard Problems

Unit III:  Sets, Counting and Probability

          6-1  Sets and Set Operations

          6-2  The Number of Elements in a Finite Set

          6-3  The Multiplication Principle

          6-4  Permutations and Combinations

          7-1  Experiments, Sample Spaces, and Events

          7-2  Definition of Probability

          7-3  Rules of Probability

          7-4  Use of Counting Techniques in Probability

          7-5  Conditional Probability and Independent Events

Unit IV:  Probability Distributions and Statistics

          8-1  Distributions of Random Variables

          8-2  Expected Value

          8-3  Variance and Standard Deviation

          8-4  The Binomial Distribution

          8-5  The Normal Distribution

          8-6  Applications of the Normal Distribution



Course Activities:

The classroom activities will include explanation and discussion

of assigned homework exercises, presentation of new material via

the blackboard and/or computer, and in class problem sessions.

Group work should be encouraged but not mandated.  The instructor

should act as a facilitator and encourage active student

participation when analyzing word problems.



Students are expected to have a calculator in their possession

for all class meetings.  A graphing calculator is strongly

recommended for this course (TI-83 if student is planning to take

Statistics).



Student Evaluation

 1.  A minimum of 4 Unit Tests.

 2.  Graded homework assignments when appropriate.

 3.  Comprehensive Final Exam (optional)

 4.  Class attendance and/or participation if you have specified

     this at the beginning of the semester.



Grading

Grades will be based on students performance in the above

designed areas.  Percentages will be determined by each

individual instructor.

          A - 90 to 100

          B -  80 to 89

          C -  70 to 79

          D -  60 to 69

          F -  Below 60

          I    Incomplete (Given only in the case of an extreme

emergency.

               The appropriate form must be submitted to the

registrar indicating

               that the course work shall be completed within one

semester.)

          NA   Not Attending

          XA   Never Attended

          W    Withdraw (This grade is given only if the student

has processed the proper                withdrawal form signed by

the instructor before the deadline date.)



Course Materials:

     

Textbook:         Finite Mathematics for the Managerial, Life,

        and Social Sciences, by S. T. Tan, 6th edition

        Publisher: Brooks/Cole,



Supplemental Materials:   (Students Solutions Manual: optional

but recommended)



Note:     Each instructor should prepare a written course

overview for the student to include, at the  minimum, the

following information:

     1.  Textbook                       4.  Attendance and

Lateness Policy

     2.  Number of Tests                5.  Test make-up policy

     3.  Grading Policy                 6.  Withdrawal policy
