            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



Mathematics 120

Pre-Calculus I

Credits:   3

Prerequisites:   Intermediate Algebra-Extended (MTH-109),

                        Reading Skills III (ENG-013) or proper

            placement exam scores

New Course:   Spring 2004



Pablo Echeverria

Chairperson, Mathematics

(856) 227-7200 x4205

pecheverriacamdencc.edu



Course Description/Goals:

This is a rigorous college algebra course designed for

engineering science, business, technology, mathematics majors,

and natural sciences majors. Topics include functions and graphs,

theory of polynomial equations, polynomial, rational,

logarithmic, and exponential functions and applications. The

teaching and use of graphing calculators are an integral part of

the course. Their use throughout the course will facilitate

understanding of salient concepts. Students are encouraged to

purchase a Texas Instruments TI-83 or TI-83 Plus calculator.



Course Outline:

P4   Rational Expressions

P5   Solving Equations

P6   Solving Inequalities

P8   Graphical Representation of Data



1.1  Graphs of Equations

1.2  Linear Equations in Two Variables

1.3  Functions

1.4  Analyzing Graph of Functions

1.5  Shifting, Reflecting, and stretching Graphs.

1.6  Combinations of Functions

1.7  Inverse Functions

1.8  Mathematical Modeling



2.1  Quadratic Functions

2.2  Polynomial Functions of Higher Degree

2.3  Polynomials and Synthetic Division

2.4  Complex Numbers

2.5  Zeros of Polynomial Functions

2.6  Rational Functions

2.7  Partial Fractions



3.1  Exponential Functions

3.2  Logarithmic Functions

3.3  Properties of Logarithms

3.4  Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

3.5  Exponential and Logarithmic Models



Course Objectives/Student Learning Outcomes:

Chapter P - Prerequisites

P.4  RATIONAL EXPRESSIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.  Find the domain of an algebraic expression.

  2.  Simplify rational expressions.

  3.  Operations with rational expressions.

  4.  Simplify complex fractions.



P.5 SOLVING EQUATIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.  Solve linear equations

  2.  Solve quadratic equations

  3.  Solve polynomial equations of higher degree

  4.  Solve radical equations

  5.  Solve absolute value equations



P.6  SOLVING INEQUALITIES

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Change interval notation to inequality notation and graph

on a real number line.

  2.   Change inequality notation to interval notation and graph

on a real number line.

  3.   Solve the following inequalities: linear inequalities,

     double inequalities, absolute value

    inequalities, polynomial inequalities, rational

  inequalities, and word problems involving

    inequalities



P.8  GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF DATA

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Understand the Cartesian plane.

2.   Find a distance using the distance formula.

3.   Find a line segments midpoint.



Chapter 1 - Functions and Their Graphs



1.1  GRAPHS OF EQUATIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.  Sketch the graph of an equation

  2.  Find x and y intercepts of graphs

  3.  Test equations for symmetry with respect to the x-axis,

the y-axis and the origin.

  4.  Find the center and radius of a circle when the equation

is written in standard form.

  5.  Use the method of completing the square to write the

equation of a circle in standard   form.



1.2       LINEAR EQUATIONS IN TWO VARIABLES

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Graphing a linear equation using slope as a ratio.

2.   Find the slope of a line, given 2 points or 1 point and the

slope.

3.   Write the equation of a line in standard form, slope-

intercept form, and point-slope form.

4.   Find the equations of vertical and horizontal lines.

5.   Find the equations of a line parallel to a given line.

6.   Find the equations of a line perpendicular to a given line.

7.   Solve application problems involving linear equations.



1.3  FUNCTIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.  Define a function, the domain of a function, and the range

of a function.

  2.  Identify whether or not a table of values specifies a

function.

  3.  Identify whether or not a given set of ordered pairs

specifies a function.

  4.  To calculate values of a function and find the domain of a

function.

  5.  Identify which equations represent functions.

  6.  Find the domain of functions that involve ratios and/or

radicals.

  7.  Set up and solve application problems involving linear and

quadratic functions.



1.4       ANALYZING GRAPHS OF FUNCTIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Identify the domain and range of a function.

  2.   Identify the graph of a function using the vertical line

     test.

3.   Determine zeros of a function.

4.   Determine the intervals on which a function is increasing,

decreasing, or constant.

5.   Graphing linear function.

6.   Graphing Step functions and Piecewise-Defined functions.

7.   Determine if a function is even, odd, or neither.

8.   Solve application problems involving functions and their

properties.



1.5  SHIFTING, REFLECTING, AND STRECHING GRAPHS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Identify and graph of common functions.

2.   Identify transformations (horizontal and vertical shifts) of

function.

3.   Identify graphs using reflections in the coordinate Axes.

4.   Identify Nonrigid transformations of common graphs.

5.   Solve application problems involving transformations of

functions.

  

1.6  Combinations of Functions

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Complete Arithmetic Combinations of Functions.

       a)   Find the sum of two functions and their domain.

b)   Find the difference of two functions and their domain.

c)   Find the product of two functions and their domain.

d)   Find the quotients of two functions and their domain.

  2.   Determine the composition of functions.

  3.   Application using Composition functions.





1.7  INVERSE FUNCTIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   View a chart showing a correspondence between values of the

     domain and range and determine if it represents a function that

     has an inverse function.

  2.  View a sketch of the graph of a function and determine if

 it has an inverse function.

  3.  Determine if the equation of a given function has an

 inverse function.

  4.   Find the inverse function   for any function f algebraically

     that is one-to-one.  If f is not one-to-one, the student will be

     able to restrict the domain to make it one-to-one and find .

  5.  Graph both the function f and its inverse on the same

coordinate system.

  6.  Solve application problems involving functions and their

inverses.



1.8       MATHEMATICAL MODELING

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.  Set up and solve application problems involving direct,

inverse and joint variation.

  2.   Use graphing calculators to find the least squares

     regression line for a given set of ordered pairs.

  

Chapter 2 Polynomial  Rational Functions

2.1  QUADRATIC FUNCTIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.  Define a general polynomial function of  with degree n.

  2.  Recognize a quadratic function  and determine its axis of

  symmetry

    and vertex.

  3.  Sketch the graph of a quadratic function

  4.  Write quadratic function in standard form

  5.  Solve application problems involving quadratic functions.



2.2  POLYNOMIAL FUNCTIONS OF HIGHER DEGREE

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Apply the leading coefficient test to determine whether the

     graph of a polynomial eventually rises or falls without bound.

  2.   Find zeros of a polynomial function by factoring.

3.   Sketch the graph of a polynomial function.

4.   State the Intermediate Value Theorem.

5.   Use the Intermediate Value Theorem to prove that a function

has a zero in a given interval.

6.   Solve application problems involving polynomial functions.



2.3  POLYNOMIAL AND SYNTHETIC DIVISION

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

 1.  Perform long division of polynomials.

 2.  Use synthetic division to perform long division of

polynomials.

 3.  Use the Remainder Theorem to find f(k) when f is a

polynomial.

 4.  Use the Factor Theorem to determine if (x-k) is a factor of

f(x) when f is a polynomial.

 5.  Solve application problems involving polynomials.

2.4  COMPLEX NUMBERS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

 1.  Define a complex number.

 2.  Identify the names for particular kinds of complex numbers.

 3.  Perform the basic operations with complex numbers.

 4.  Perform operations with complex conjugates and division.

 5.  Find complex solutions to quadratic equations.



2.5  REAL ZEROS OF POLYNOMIAL FUNCTIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Use the Rational Zero Test to

       a.   Find all possible rational zeros of a polynomial.

       b.   Test the possible rational zeros of a polynomial.

c.   Test rational zero test with leading coefficient of 1.

  2.   Determine each of the following if a polynomial is given in

     a factored form:

       a.   Factoring a polynomial.

b.   The zeros of the polynomial

c.   The multiplicity of the zeros

d.   The degree of the polynomial

  3.   Write the equation of the polynomial in factored form if the

     zeros and their multiplicity are given.

4.   Determine the possible combinations of real and imaginary

zeros for any given polynomial.

5.   Write P(x) as a product of first degree factors if given one

zero.

  6.   Multiply

  7.   Use Descartes Rule of Signs to explore the types and

     numbers of real zeros of a given polynomial.

8.   Use the Upper and Lower Bound Rule to find a upper and a

lower bound for the real zeros of a polynomial.

9.   Solve application problems involving polynomials.



2.6  RATIONAL FUNCTIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.Find the domain of a rational function.

  2.Find vertical and horizontal asymptotes of rational

  functions.

  3.   Find oblique asymptotes of rational functions.

4.   Graph rational functions.

  5.   Solve application problems involving rational functions.

  

2.8  PARTIAL FRACTIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.Decompose   into partial fractions when   consists of:

     Linear factors, Nonfactorable quadratic factors, and

     Combinations of linear and quadratic factors



Chapter 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

3.1  EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS



Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Evaluating exponential expressions.

  2.   Graph

  3.   Apply if  then

4.   Find transformation of graphs of exponential functions.

5.   Add, subtract, multiply and raise to power exponential

expressions.

6.   Write formulas representing exponential growth or decay from

given information.

7.   Write formulas representing compound interest from given

information.

8.   Graph and evaluate natural exponential functions.



3.2  LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.  Define and list the properties of logarithmic functions.

  2.  Change an logarithmic equation to equivalent exponential

  form.

  3.  Change an exponential equation to equivalent logarithmic

  form.

  4.  Sketch graphs of logarithmic functions.

  5.  Define and list the properties of the Natural Logarithmic

  Function.

  6.  Evaluate logarithmic expressions with and without a

  calculator.

  7.  Solve application problems involving logarithmic

  functions.



3.3  PROPERTIES OF LOGARITHMS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Use the Change-of-Base Formula to change logarithmic

     expressions to common or natural log form.

2.   Identify properties of logarithms.

3.   List and use properties of logarithms to rewrite logarithmic

expressions

4.   Expand logarithmic expressions.

5.   Condense logarithmic expressions.

6.   Find a logarithmic model.



3.4  EXPONENTIAL  LOGARITHMIC EQUATIONS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Solve exponential equations.

2.   Solve an exponential equation of quadratic type.

3.   Solve a logarithmic equation.

4.   Set up and solve application problems involving doubling an

investment and consumer

    price



3.5  EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC MODELS

Behavioral Objectives:

The student will be able to:

  1.   Identify the five common types of mathematical models:

       a)   Exponential growth model

b)   Exponential decay model

c)   Gaussian model

d)   Logistic growth model

e)   Logarithmic models

  2.   Solve population increase.

3.   Solve Carbon dating.

4.   Solve spread of a virus.

5.   Solve magnitude of earthquake.



Instructional Materials:

The primary teaching instrument is the blackboard.  You make your

own transparencies for the overhead projector.  The AV Department

will assist you.  They are located in the LRC basement.  You may

also use the TI83 overhead projection unit for the graphing

calculators.



Course Activities:

The classroom activities will include formal and informal

lectures where new materials and assigned problems will be

explained.  Students will have the opportunity to contribute to

the discussion and to ask questions about the material.  The

calculator will be an integral part of the class.  The computer

will be stressed whenever possible.



Evaluation Methods:

Student progress will be evaluated on the following basis:

1.  Unit Tests

2.  Periodic Quizzes, if you deem they are necessary to motivate

  students to study and attend class on a regular basis.

3.  Class attendance, if you have specified this at the beginning

  of the semester.

4.  Comprehensive final examination (optional, but strongly

encouraged).

5.  Homework assignments, if collected and graded (optional)



Grading:

Grades will be based on students performance in the above-

designated areas.  Percentages will be assigned by each

individual professor.



          A    90  to  100

          B    80  to   89

          C    70  to   79

          D    60  to   69

          F    Below 60

          I    Incomplete (only under extreme emergencies)

               must be completed within one semester.

          NA   Not attending

          W    Withdraw (student must turn in official withdrawal

form

               before cut-off date).



Textbook:

     Precalculus, 5th edition, 2001, Larson  Hostetler, Houghton

Mifflin

     ISBN: 0-618-06646-2
