            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                 Department Master Syllabus

                    Camden County College

                    Blackwood, New Jersey



Course Title:                 Biostatistics



Course Number:                MTH-134



Department/Program Affiliation:    Mathematics



Date of Review:                    4/8/08

(This Department Master Syllabus has been examined by the

program/department faculty members and it is decided that no

revision is necessary at this time.)



Date of Last Revision:             9/23/08

(This Department Master Syllabus has been examined by the

program/department faculty members and it is decided a

change requiring a revision is necessary at this time.)



N.B.    A change to the course materials alone (textbooks

and/or supplementary materials) may not constitute a

revision.  Any other change to the items listed below on

this form is considered a revision and requires approval by

the program faculty at a Program/Department Meeting and by

the division at a Chairs and Coordinator Meeting.



Credits:   4



Contact Hours:   Lecture  3               Lab     3

Other 



Prerequisites:      MTH-140(Calculus I) , BIO-111(Biology I

               Science) AND ENG-101(English Comp. I)



Co-requisites:      None



Course Description: This course emphasizes experimentation

and application of statistical methods to the biological

sciences. Topics include exploring, describing, and

organizing data, discrete and continuous random variables

and probability distributions, one and two sample estimation

and hypothesis testing,  linear regression and correlation,

contingency tables, analysis of variance, and non-parametric

methods. A statistical software package will be used to

manipulate data, carry out statistical analyses and formally

present results. Biology majors will comprise most of the

students registering for this course. Lab sessions are

taught by a member of the Biology department.



Course Student Learning Outcomes:



Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:



1.   Interpret, and analyze appropriate numerical summaries

     of sample data and estimates for populations.



2.   Apply critical thinking skills to interpret appropriate

     graphical summaries and representations of sample

     data.4.   calculate values in a partially completed

     life table and find probabilities of living to a

     certain age from a life table. TYPO OR a copy-paste-

     o

3.        Calculate basic probabilities for complementary,

     joint, mutually-exclusive, conditional, and independent

     events, under general additive and multiplicative

     rules.

4.   Apply and evaluate probability in statistical context,

     including level of confidence or significance, p-value

     of a test, appropriate sample size for a given test or

     confidence interval, important formulaic (e.g.

     binomial) and tabled (e.g., normal, t, chi-square, F)

     distributions, and nonparametric methods.

5.   Distinguish between the distribution of a random

     variable and the sampling distribution of an estimator

     or statistic.

6.   Apply knowledge of appropriate probability

     distributions and statistical procedures to construct

     confidence intervals and conduct tests of hypotheses,

     consistent with experimental contexts.

7.   Employ the concepts of variation, chance, randomness,

     independence, randomization, and association in

     statistical procedures.

8.   Use and interpret inferential procedures (confidence

     intervals and tests of hypotheses) including one-

     sample, paired-sample, two-sample, and many-sample

     (ANOVA) inferences, regression and correlation

     analysis, contingency tables, and nonparametric

     techniques.

9.   Use computer software to describe, generate, summarize,

     display, and analyze data (including the perspective of

     EDA), and present results in a clear and professional

     manner.

10.       Accurately and appropriately apply mathematical

     and statistical notation.



Course Outline:



Unit I: Introduction to Biostatistics

Basic Concepts and Definitions

Computers and Biostatistical Analysis

  

Unit II:  Descriptive Statistics

Grouped Data-Frequency Distributions

Statistical Graphics

Measures of Central Tendency and Dispersion

Exploratory Data Analysis

  

Unit III:  Probability

Classical, Empirical, and Subjective

Elementary Properties of Probability

Calculating the Probability of an Event (Conditional

probability, Addition  Multiplication Rules, and

Independence)



Unit IV: Probability Distributions

Probability Distributions of Discrete Variables

The Binomial Distribution

Continuous Probability Distributions

The Normal Distribution and its Applications



Unit V: Sampling Distributions

Sampling Distributions of the Sample Mean and Sample

Proportion



Unit VI: Estimation

The  t Distribution

Confidence Interval for a Population Mean

Confidence Interval for the Difference Between Two

Population Means

Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion

Confidence Interval for the Difference Between Two

Population Proportions













Unit VII: Hypothesis Testing

A Single Population Mean

The Difference Between Two Population Means

Paired t-tests

The Difference Between Two Population Proportions



Unit VIII: Analysis of Variance

Single Factor ANOVA

Two Factor ANOVA



Unit IX: Correlation and Regression/ Regression Analysis

The Regression Model

The Simple Regression Equation

Inference in Simple Linear Regression

Correlation

The Correlation Coefficient



Unit X: The Chi-Square Distribution and the Analysis of

Frequencies

Tests of Goodness-of-Fit

Tests of Independence

Tests of Homogeneity



Unit XI: Nonparametric and Distribution-Free Statistics

The Sign Test

The Mann-Whitney Test

The Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test

The Kruskal-Wallis One-Way Analysis of Variance





Course Activities: The classroom lecture and discussion will

include statistical computer software.  All lab sessions

will be biological in nature. Homework assignments, tests,

or projects as determined by the instructor are to be

completed using a statistical software package.



Assessment of Student Learning Outcomes:

The student will be evaluated on the degree to which student

learning outcomes are achieved.  A variety of methods may be

used such as tests, class participation, projects, homework

assignments, etc.

1.In-class tests.

2.Lab reports.

3.Quizzes when appropriate

4.Graded homework assignments when appropriate

5.Software based projects

6.Comprehensive final examination.



Course Materials:

     Textbook(s):   Biostatistics: A Foundation for Analysis

in the Health Sciences,

               Daniel, Wayne W., Wiley Publishing, 8th ed.





Supplemental Material
