CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE



Course:  CS 170  PC Services and Support

 

Credits: 6



Prerequisites 

      RD 100

      

Description 

      Provides students with the technical training and diagnostic skills 
required to support high technology in a multi-faceted environment including 
operating system essentials, trouble shooting, hardware installation and 
configuration, printer diagnostics and troubleshooting, and an overview of 
local area networks. During hands-on lab instruction, students are teamed in 
small work groups to take apart and rebuild a PC. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand the fundamentals of supporting and troubleshooting computer 
hardware and software. 



Topical Outline

Outline 1

 Introducing and Comparing Operating Systems

 How an OS Works with Hardware and Other Software

 Understanding the Boot Process and Command Line

 Supporting Windows 9x/Me

 Understanding and Installing Windows 2000 and Windows NT

 Managing and Troubleshooting Windows 2000

 Installing and Using Windows XP Professional

 Managing and Supporting Windows XP

 Managing Memory

 Supporting Hard Drives

 Windows on a Network

 Windows on the Internet

 Printers, the Mac OS, and Linux

Outline 2

 How Computers Work

 How Hardware and Software Work Together

 Electricity and Power Supplies

 The Motherboard

 Managing Memory

 Floppy Drives

 Understanding and Installing Hard Drives

 Supporting I/O Devices

 Multimedia Devices and Mass Storage

 Supporting Modems

 PCs on a Network

 Notebook, Tablet PCs and PDAs

 Supporting Printers

 All About SCSI

 Purchasing a PC or Building Your Own

 Troubleshooting and Maintenance Fundamentals



Texts

      A Guide to Software: Managing, Maintaining and Troubleshooting by 
Andrews, 4th edition: Thomson Course Technology. 

      A Guide to Hardware: Maintaining  Troubleshooting by Andrews, 4th 
edition: Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
