CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 226  Network Infrastructure Implementation



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

      CS 175, CS 217, CS 275

      

Description 

      Prepares the student for installing and supporting a network 
infrastructure that uses the Microsoft Windows 2003 Server family of 
products. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Perform IP Addressing Basics

 Configure a Network Interface

 Implement Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol

 Manage and Monitor DHCP

 Configure Name Resolution

 Implement and Manage the DNS Service

 Implement and manage WINS

 Secure Network Traffic

 Remote Access

 Internet Authentication Service

 Understand Routing

 Use Security Templates

 Troubleshoot Network Connectivity.



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Windows Server 2003

 Managing Hardware Devices

 Creating and Managing User Accounts

 Implementing and Managing Group and Computer Accounts

 Managing File Access

 Managing Disks and Data Storage

 Advanced File System Management

 Implementing and Managing Printers

 Implementing and Using Group Policy

 Server Administration

 Monitoring Server Performance

 Managing and Implementing Backups and Disaster Recovery

 Administering Web Resources

 Windows Server 2003 Security Features



Texts

      MCSE Guide to Managing Microsoft Windows Server 2003 Network Enhanced 
by McCann, Eckert, Schitka, 1st edition: Thomson Course Technology. 

70-291: WEB-Based Labs for MCSE/MCSA Guide to Managing a Microsoft Windows 
Server 2003 Network, 2004 edition: Thomson Course Technology. 

70-291: Lab Manual for MCSE/MCSA Guide to Managing a Microsoft Windows 
Server 2003 Network by Carswell, 2004 edition: Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
