CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 216  JAVA Programming



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

      CS 112 or permission of the instructor.

      

Description 

      Provides the student with hands-on instruction on this object-oriented 
computer language. Students will develop stand alone business applications 
and applets. Emphasis is placed on syntax, managing objects, arrays, 
conditionals and loops creating classes, threads, graphics and fonts and 
advanced designs including animation, images, and sound. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand problem solving and programming techniques with Java

 Do object-oriented programming

 Use testing and debugging techniques, program style, inheritance, and 
exception handling 

 Distinguish between applications over applets.



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Computers and Java

 Primitive Types, Strings, and Console I/O

 Flow of Control

 Defining Classes and Methods

 More About Objects and Methods

 Arrays

 Inheritance

 Exception Handling

 Streams and File I/O

 Dynamic Data Structures and Generics

 Recursion

 Window Interfaces Using Swing

 Applets and HTML

 More Swing



Texts

Savitch, Java: An Intro to Problem Solving  Programming (s/Codekey), 4th







Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
