            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE

Course:  CS 233 Networking Hardware and Routing

Credits: 4

Prerequisites
CS 217 

Description 
This course focuses on initial router configuration, IOS software management, routing protocol configuration, TCP/IP, and explains the principles of routing and the primary routing protocols. Prerequisite: CS 217.

Learning Outcomes
After the completion of this course, students should be able to:
* Demonstrate initial routing configuration
* Apply IOS software management
* Indentify routing protocol configuration
* Explain principle of routing and primary routing protocols

Topical Outline
* Initial routing configuration
* IOS software management
* Routing protocol configuration
* Routing and primary routing protocols

Text
REQUIRED MATERIALS – Packet Tracer v5.3, available for download from the Cisco Netacad site - Routing Protocols and Concepts, CCNA Exploration Labs and Study Guide – Cisco Press – ISBN 1-58713-2044-4 – All other instruction and testing is delivered over the Internet from the Cisco website – access information – cisco.netacad.net

OPTIONAL MATERIALS –. Routing Protocols and Concepts, CCNA Exploration Companion Guide - Cisco Press- ISBN 1-58713-206-0.

Student Assessment
Eleven Module exams and a final exam will be taken from the Cisco assessment server.  Module exams are taken online and the final exam is taken in class as provided in the course schedule.  The final exam is work 36 points toward your final grade and the average of the chapter exams is worth 44 points toward your final grade.

LABS – Labs and activities are assigned from the Labs and Study Guide as provided in a separate handout and additional labs and activities may be assigned.  The labs and activities are due one week after they are assigned.  Up to 10 points toward your final grade will be awarded for the labs and activities based upon how many were submitted, if they were on time and the accuracy of the submission.  Some labs and activities are assigned as homework and some are done in class.

SKILLS ASSESSMENT – A timed, hands on skills assessment will be give at the end of the course.  The skills assessment must be completed in the time allotted.  The skills assessment is worth 10 points toward your final grade if completed on the first try.  The skills assessment may be retaken twice.  Completion on the second try is worth 8 points.  Completion on the third try is worth 6 points.

GRADING – Course grades are based on the number of points accumulated as described above and are converted to a letter grade as follows:
					A	- 90 or higher
					B+	- 86-89
					B	- 80-85
					C+	- 76-79
					C	- 70-75
					D	- 60-69
					F	- less than 60

Academic Integrity
Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else without proper documentation.
Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental [ignorance of the proper rules for handling material is no excuse], plagiarism is, indeed, a “criminal” offense.
As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the discretion of the instructor.


Note
If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.8600, x282 for information on assistance that can be provided to eligible students.
CS 233 Mst_SYL_09

