CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 227  Active Directory Design



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

      CS 175, CS 275

      

Description 

      Prepares students to design Microsoft Windows 2003 directory services 
infrastructure in an enterprise network. Assists students in identifying the 
information technology needs of an organization and then design an Active 
Directory structure that meets those needs. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand the concepts of Active Directory

 Install, configure, and troubleshoot Active Directory

 Manage, monitor, and optimize the components of Active Directory.



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Active Directory

 Name Resolution and DNS

 Active Directory Design Philosophy

 Active Directory Architecture

 Active Directory Logical Design

 Active Directory Physical Design

 Active Directory Replication

 Active Directory Operations Masters

 Active Directory Authentication and Security

 Managing Users, Groups, Computers, and Resources

 Group Policy for Corporate Policy

 Deploying and Managing Software with Group Policy

 Monitoring and Optimizing Active Directory

 Disaster Recovery



Texts

      MCSE Guide to Designing a Microsoft Windows Server 2003 Active 
Directory  Network Infrastructure by Adamson: Thomson Course Tech. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
