CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 175  Core Client Operating System



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

      CS 170



Description 

Students are introduced to the functions and features of installing, 
configuring and maintaining Windows 2000 Professional as a client operating 
system. Through hands-on lab instruction, students will learn about 
installation, administration of resources, managing and troubleshooting 
hardware devices and drivers, network protocols, and security. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Master the skills needed to maintain a core client operating system

 Prepare for the MCSE certification exam.



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Windows XP Professional

 Installing windows XP Professional

 Using the System Utilities

 Managing Windows XP File Systems and Storage

 Users, Groups, Profiles, and Policies

 Windows XP Security and Access Controls

 Network Protocols

 Internetworking with Remote Access

 Printing and Faxing

 Performance Tuning

 Windows XP Professional Application Support

 Working with the Windows XP Registry

 Booting Windows XP

 Windows XP Professional Fault Tolerance

 Troubleshooting with Windows XP



Texts

      MCSE Guide to Microsoft Windows XP Professional by Tittle  Stewart: 
Thompson Course Technology. 

      70-270 Lab Manual for MCSE Guide to Microsoft Windows XP Professional 
by Simpson, Reimer  Keding, 2nd edition: Thomson Course Technology. 

      70-270 MCSE/MCSA: LabSim for Microsoft Windows XP Professional,2nd 
edition: Thomson course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
