CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 241  Computer Forensics



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

      Approval of the instructor.

      

Description 

      Provides students with methods to properly conduct a computer 
forensics investigation beginning with discussion of ethics, while mapping 
to the objectives of the International Association of Computer Investigation 
Specialists (IACIS) certification. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Demonstrate a working knowledge of computers, storage devices, and digital 
data 

 Explain the responsibilities and liabilities of a computer forensic 
investigator 

 Plan and prepare for an incident requiring computer forensic skills

 Seize a Computer from a crime scene without damaging it or risking it 
becoming inadmissible in a court of law 

 Explain where digital evidence resides on computer storage devices

 Demonstrate basic skills with WinHex software for recovering digital 
evidence from computer storage devices 

 Hire experts to perform detailed forensic analysis and expert testimony.



Topical Outline

 Computer Forensics as a Profession

 Computing Investigation Processes

 Operating Systems, Boot Processes , and Disk Structures

 The Investigators Office

 Current Computer Forensics Tools

 Digital Evidence Controls

 Crime/Incident Scene Processing

 Data Acquisition

 Computing Forensics Analysis

 Data Hiding Techniques

 Email Investigations

 Graphic Image Recovery

 High Tech Reports

 Expert Witness Overview

 Project Presentation



Texts

      Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations  by Nelson, Phillips, 
Enfinger, Steuart, 2nd edition: Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
