CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 210  Database Management



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

CS 112 or equivalent



Description 

      Introduces students to the principles of database structure, data 
administration, and data analysis. Students gain hands-on experience in the 
creation and retrieval from a database. SQL will be introduced. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Design and create tables with proper field names

 Query and retrieve data from a database

 Restructure, update, and maintain integrity of databases

 Generate reports utilizing forms and macros.



Topical Outline

 Creating and Using a Database

 Querying a Database Using the Select Query Window

 Maintaining a Database Using the Design and Update Feature

 Reports, Forms, and Combo Boxes

 Enhancing forms w/OLE Fields, Hyperlinks, and Subforms

 Switchboards, PivotTables, and PivotCharts

 Advanced Report and Form Techniques

 Using VBA and Creating Multi-Page Forms

 Administering a Database System

 SQL: Feature Using SQL



Texts

      Microsoft Access 2003 Comprehensive Concepts  Tech, 2005 by Shelly, 
Cashman  Pratt, 2005: Course Tech. 

      Concepts of Database Management by Pratt  Adamski: Course Tech.



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
