CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 183  i-Net



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

CS 170, CS 217



Description 

      Students are introduced to internet basics, internet clients, 
development, networking, Internet security and business issues. The student 
is prepared to implement and manage Internet, intranet and extranet 
infrastructure and services as well as develop related applications. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand the various different technologies that form and make the 
internet work 

 Understand current technologies and make intelligent business decisions 
concerning the Internet. 



Topical Outline

 Using the Internet

 Building Your Own Web Site

 How Clients and Servers Work Together

 Sights and Sounds of the Internet

 Understanding Networks

 Internet Infrastructure

 Internet Clients

 Solving Client Problems

 Web Programming and Related Tools

 Databases and Web Hosting

 Internet Security

 Doing Business on the Web



Texts

      i-Net Guide to the Internet Technologies (w/CD) by Andrews, 3rd 
edition: Thompson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
