CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE



Course:  CS 242  Principles of Information and Web Security



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

None



Description 

      Examines the field of information security to prepare information 
systems students for their roles as business decision-makers. A balance of 
the managerial and technical aspects of the discipline is presented. 
Information within real-world context is included in this course. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Identify and discuss the fundamental reasons why information systems 
security is such a critical element in todays business, government, 
education, and home technology-based environments 

 Identify and discuss the key information systems security legislative and 
policy documents that provide guidance in developing an information system 
security program for an organization (information literacy) 

 Review and develop the key elements of an information systems security 
management program 

 Perform and document a risk-based analysis of information systems security 
for an organization, to include identification of threats, vulnerabilities, 
and countermeasures (effective writing) 

 Develop a security plan to address the results of the risk assessment 
(effective writing) 

 Research and report on the key technological solutions to achieving 
information systems security (information literacy, effective writing) 

 Identify and discuss the ethical and societal issues related to 
implementing information systems security programs (civic responsibility). 



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Information Security

 The Need for Security

 Legal, Ethical, and Professional Issues in Information Security

 Risk Management: Identifying and Assessing Risk

 Risk Management: Assessing and Controlling Risk

 Blueprint for Security

 Planning for Continuity

 Security Technology

 Appendix: Cryptography

 Physical Security

 Implementing Security

 Security and Personnel

 Information Security Maintenance

 Comprehensive Review



Texts

      Principles of Information Security by Whitman  Mattord, 2nd edition: 
Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
