CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 212  C Programming



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

      CS 112 or permission from the instructor.



Description 

      Emphasizes problem solving strategies, analysis of algorithms, and use 
of simple data structures to formulate object-oriented solutions to 
problems. Topics include construction, inheritance, polymorphism, standard 
libraries, arrays, pointers, and strings. Object-oriented concepts and 
terminology will be presented with a focus on using classes for program 
specification and design. Students will learn how classes are declared, 
defined, used and organized into coherent designs. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand the basic foundation of important programming principles

 Create and manipulate sequential access files, structs, classes, and 
arrays. 



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Computers and Java

 Primitive Types, Strings, and Console I/O

 Flow of Control

 Defining Classes and Methods

 More About Objects and Methods

 Arrays

 Inheritance

 Exception Handling

 Streams and File I/O

 Dynamic Data Structures and Generics

 Recursion

 Window Interfaces Using Swing

 Applets and HTML

 More Swing



Texts

      Java and Introduction to Problem Solving  by Savitch, Prentice Hall.



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
