CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 108  Introduction to Web Page Development



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

None 



Description 

      Introduces the novice computer user to the concepts and techniques of 
the basic features of an operating system and of the design and development 
of Web pages using a Web site design program. A hands-on computer approach 
using step-by-step instructions will be used. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Create a Web site

 Enhance a Web site with graphics and hyperlinks

 Use lists, anchors, Web site views, shared borders, and themes

 Use tables and frames

 Publish a Web site.



Topical Outline

 Creating a Web Site

 Working with Graphics and Hyperlinks

 Using Lists, Anchors, and Web Site Views

 Using Shared Borders and Themes

 Creating Tables and Frames

 Publishing a Web Site



Texts

      New Perspectives of Microsoft Front Page 2003, Introductory, 2003 by 
Evans, 2003: Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
