CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 111  Computer Science I



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

None 



Description 

      Students will learn the fundamentals of programming in an 
object-oriented three dimensional interactive animation environment. 
Students will create animation projects using a special software package for 
creating animation in small virtual worlds using three-dimensional models. 
Students will obtain a strong core of fundamental programming concepts and 
problem-solving techniques providing a basis for further study in a variety 
of computer related fields. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Develop algorithms through textual storyboards

 Implement and design a program using animation software

 Understand object oriented development techniques: classes, objects, 
methods, functions, and parameters 

 Understand core programming concepts: if/else, loops, while, recursion

 Develop interactive programs using events and event handlers.



Topical Outline

 Getting Started with Alice

 Program Design and Implementation

 Programming: Putting Together the Pieces

 Classes, Objects, Methods, and Parameters

 Interaction: Events and Event Handling

 Functions and If/Else

 Repetition: Definite and Indefinite Loops

 Repetition: Recursion



Texts

      Learning to Program With Alice by Dann, Cooper  Pavsch: 
Pearson/Prentice Hall. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 





Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
