CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 286  Building an effective Website



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

      CS 218 and CS 210



Description 

      Introduces the students to client-server websites that will access 
back-end databases through front-end Web based forms. Students will learn 
how to use database to Web gateway software. Students will also use Web 
utilities to create and enhance website layouts. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Upgrade to the XHTML document type replace strings in the source code 
replace tags strip unwanted tags close empty tags that have attributes find 
images without alt attribute and validate XHTML 

 Understand dynamic web sites basics choose a server model pass data between 
pages send email from a web form and build a price calculator 

 Connect to a database retrieve data from a database display data from a  
database customize data display insert data in a database and update data in 
a database 

 Create a search form create a results page handle empty results page, 
authenticate users and add password protection and security to a web site 

 Work with layers make selections work with type work with special layer 
functions create special effects with filters 

 Optimize images for web use create buttons for a web page create slices in 
a document and create a rollover effect. 



Topical Outline

 Upgrading to XHTML

 Dynamic Web Sites, Passing Data Between Pages, Sending Email from a Web 
Form and Building a Tour Price Calculator 

 Data Sources and Connecting to a Database

 Retrieving, Displaying, Inserting and Updating Data

 Building a Search Interface, Password Protection  Security

 Working with Layers, Making Selections, Placing Type in an Image Creating 
Special Effects with Filters 

 Learn about ImagReady, Optimize Images for Web Use, Create a Button for a 
web page, Create Slices in a Document, Create a Rollover Effect 





Texts

      Macromedia Dreamweaver MX Dynamic Apps by Bardzell: Pearson education.

      Adobe Photoshop by Reding: Thomson Course Technology.

      



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
