CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 215  Visual Basic Programming



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

      CS 112 or permission of the instructor.

      

Description 

      Introduces the student to the standards and conventions of programming 
the graphical user interface (GUI). Emphasis will be placed on proper 
design, placement, and coding of graphical features on the interface. Visual 
Basic will be utilized to develop GUI design programs and to use simple and 
array variables, database access, animation, as well as sequential and 
random file access, 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Emphasize human interface design principles and how to implement them in 
Visual Basic 

 Compare and contrast traditional procedural languages with event driven 
languages 

 Review elementary Visual Basic concepts

 Introduce procedure, functions, debugging and error handling.



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Visual Basic.NET

 More Controls

 Variables, Constants, and Calculations

 Decisions and Conditions

 Menus, Sub Procedures, and Sub Functions

 OOP: Creating Object-Oriented Programs

 Lists, Loops, and Printing

 Arrays

 Programming With Web Forms

 Accessing DataBase Files

 Saving Data and Objects in Files

 Graphics in Windows and the Web

 Advanced Topics in Visual Basic



Texts

      Programming in Visual Basic.NET: Update Edition for VB.NET 2003  
w/5-CD VB.Net 2008 Software set by Bradley  Millspaugh, 5th edition: McGraw 
Hill. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
