CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 275  Core Server Operating System



Credits: 4



Co-requisites 

      CS 170

      

Description 

      Prepares the student to install and configure Windows 2003 Server to 
create file, print, Web, and Terminal servers. Through hands-on lab 
instruction, students will learn about installation, access to resources, 
managing and troubleshooting hardware devices and drivers, network 
protocols, and security. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Manage basic disks and dynamic disks

 Monitor server hardware.  Tools might include Device Manager, the Hardware 
Troubleshooting Wizard, and appropriate Control Panel items 

 Optimize server disk performance

 Troubleshoot server hardware devices

 Install and configure server hardware devices

 Manage local, roaming, and mandatory user profiles

 Create and manage computer accounts in an Active Directory environment

 Create and manage groups

 Create and manage user accounts

 Troubleshoot computer accounts

 Troubleshoot user accounts

 Troubleshoot user authentication issues

 Configure access to shared folders

 Troubleshoot Terminal Services

 Configure file system permissions

 Troubleshoot access to files and shared folders

 Monitor and analyze events.  Tools might include Event Viewer and System 
Monitor 

 Manage software update infrastructure

 Manage software site licensing

 Manage servers remotely

 Troubleshoot print queues

 Monitor system performance

 Monitor file and print servers.  Tools might include Task Manager, Event 
Viewer, and System Monitor 

 Monitor and optimize a server environment for application performance

 Manage a Web server

 Perform system recovery for a server

 Manage backup procedures

 Recover from server hardware failure

 Restore backup data

 Schedule backup jobs.



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Windows Server 2003

 Managing Hardware Devices

 Creating and Managing User Accounts

 Implementing and Managing Group and Computer Accounts

 Managing File Access

 Managing Disks and Data Storage

 Advanced File System Management 

 Implementing and Managing Printers

 Implementing and Using Group Policy

 Server Administration

 Monitoring Server Performance

 Managing and Implementing Backups and Disaster Recovery

 Administering Web Resources

 Windows Server 2003 Security Features



Texts

      MCSE Guide to Managing a Microsoft Windows Server 2003 byMcCann, 
DiNicolo, Enhanced: Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
