CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 231  Network Infrastructure Design



Credits: 3 



Prerequisites 

      CS 175, CS 275, and take the last semester of the program of study.

      

Description 

      This capstone course prepares the students to create a networking 
services infrastructure design that supports the required network 
applications based on the needs of the organization using advanced 
technologies to provide Internet Protocol (IP) address configuration or to 
design an IP routing scheme. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Analyze business requirements for designing security. Considerations 
include existing policies and procedures, sensitivity of data, cost, legal 
requirements, end-user impact, interoperability, maintainability, 
scalability, and risk 

 Design a framework for designing and implementing security.  The framework 
should include prevention, detection, isolation, and recovery. 

 Analyze technical constraints when designing security

 Design a public key infrastructure (PKI) that uses Certificate Services

 Design a logical authentication strategy

 Design security for network management

 Design a security update infrastructure

 Design network infrastructure security

 Design security for wireless networks

 Design user authentication for Internet Information Services (IIS)

 Design security for Internet Information Services (IIS)

 Design security for communication between networks

 Design security for communication with external organizations

 Design security for servers that have specific roles. Roles include domain 
controller, network infrastructure server, file server, IIS server, terminal 
server, and POP3 mail server 

 Design an access control strategy for directory services

 Design an access control strategy for files and folders

 Design an access control strategy for the registry

 Design a client authentication strategy

 Design a security strategy for client remote access

 Design a strategy for securing client computers.  Considerations include 
desktop and portable computers. 



Topical Outline

 The Assessment Stage

 Developing the Active Directory Infrastructure Design

 Developing the Network Services Design

 Designing the Logical Components

 Name Resolution

 Remote Access and Address Management

 Service Sizing and Placement

 The Physical Design



Texts

      MCSE Guide to Designing Microsoft Windows 2003 Active Directory 
Network Infrastructure (w/CD) by Holcome: Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
