CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 240  Security



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

CS 170, CS 217



Description 

      Provides students with a comprehensive overview of network security. 
The course covers the general security concepts communication security, 
information security, cryptography basics, and operational/organizational 
security are explored in how it relates to further avenues of specialization 
for the security student. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand network security goals, threats, and factors involved in a 
secure network strategy 

 Learn to identify and deal with various security attacks and malicious 
codes 

 Understand and deal with the different vulnerabilities associated with 
telecommuting and VPN technology 

 Understand e-mail vulnerabilities and how to safeguard against them

 Understand the vulnerabilities of JavaScript, buffer overflow, ActiveX, 
cookies, CGI, applets, SMTP relay, and how they are commonly exploited 

 Understand security issues related to wireless media and how to do a 
wireless site survey 

 Understand network security topologies  devices and learn to apply the 
security features of VPNs 

 Understand and apply intrusion detection systems

 Have a basic understanding of the concepts of cryptography and how they 
relate to network security 

 Understand and be able to design the disaster recovery planning process.

 Understand and be able to apply the basic computer forensics methods.



Topical Outline

 Security Overview

 Authentication

 Attacks and Malicious Code

 Remote Access

 E-mail

 Web Security

 Directory and File Transfer Services

 Wireless and Instant Messaging

 Devices

 Media and Medium

 Network Security Topologies

 Intrusion Detection

 Security Baselines

 Physical Security

 Cryptography

 Computer Forensics and Advanced Topics

 Disaster Recovery and Business



Texts

      Guide to Network Security Fundamentals (w/CD) by Boswell, Calvert  
Campbell, 2nd edition: CISCO Learning Inst. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
