CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 228  Active Directory Design and Implementation



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

      CS 175, CS 275



Description 

      Students are introduced to the principles of Active Directory 
structure, administration, configuration and maintenance. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand principles of Active Directory structure, administration, 
configuration and maintenance. 



Topical Outline

 Introduction to Active Directory

 Name Resolution and DNS

 Active Directory Design Philosophy

 Active Directory Architecture

 Active Directory Logical Design

 Active Directory Physical Design

 Active Directory Replication

 Active Directory Operations Masters

 Active Directory Authentication and Security

 Managing Users, Groups, Computers, and Resources

 Group Policy for Corporate Policy

 Deploying and Managing Software with Group Policy

 Monitoring and Optimizing Active Directory

 Disaster Recovery



Texts

      MCSE Guide to Microsoft Windows 2003 Active Directory by Willis, 
Enhanced: Thomson Course Technology. 

      MCSE Guide to Window 2003 Active Directory Enhanced Lab Sim by Willis, 
Enhanced: Thomson Course Technology. 

      Lab Manual for MCSE Guide to Microsoft Windows Server 2003 Active 
Directory by DiNicolo,  Aubert, 2004 edition: Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 





Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
