CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE







Course:  CS 101  M Introduction to Microcomputers



Credits:  3



Prerequisites 

      None



Description

      Designed for students with an understanding of computers. This course 
will 

introduce Windows file management. Students will work with word processing, 

spreadsheets and presentation software.



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

Utilize the operating system software to perform basic file functions on 

the computer

Use work processing software to create, edit, format, and print documents

Use spreadsheet software to create, edit , format, and print worksheets

Use presentation software to prepare computerized slide presentations.



Topical Outline

Windows and File Management

Word  Creating a Document

Word  Editing and Formatting a Document

Word  Creating a Multiple-Page Report

Excel  Using Excel to Manage Data

Excel  Working with Formulas and Functions

Excel  Developing a professional-Looking Worksheet

PowerPoint  Creating a Presentation

PowerPoint  Applying and Modifying Text and Graphic Objects



Texts

      New Perspectives Microsoft Office Edition, Office 2003, 2nd edition: 
Thomson 

Course Technology.



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 

presentations and/or papers)



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 

speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper 

documentation.



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper 

rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a criminal 
offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the 

student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the discretion of the 
instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through 

the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning disability, 
contact Project 

Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on assistance that can be 
provided to 

eligible students.
