CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE







Course:  CS 102  M Applications on the Microcomputer



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

      CS 101, placement by computer skills inventory assessment or 
permission of the 

instructor.



Description 

      Covers the more advanced features of word processing and spreadsheets 
that are 

not covered in CS 101 as well as database software. The integration of 
application 

software will also be covered. 





Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

Use word processing software for basic desktop publishing

Use spreadsheet software to create, edit  and print various types of charts 

and graphs

Use database management software to create, maintain, and query data in 

files and to produce basic forms and reports

Integrate work processing, spreadsheets, database management, and 

presentation software for more effective and efficient use of software.



Topical Outline

Desktop Publishing a Newsletter

Spreadsheet Charts and Graphics

Integrating Word Processing and Spreadsheets

Introduction to Database Management

Creating and Maintaining a Database

Querying a Database

Creating Forms and Reports

Integrating Word Processing, Spreadsheets, and Databases

Integrating Word Processing , Spreadsheets, Databases, and Presentations



Texts

      New Perspectives Microsoft Office Edition, Office 2003, 2nd edition: 
Thomson 

Course Technology.



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 

presentations and/or papers)



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 

speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper 

documentation.



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper 

rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a criminal 
offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the 

student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the discretion of the 
instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through 

the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning disability, 
contact Project 

Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on assistance that can be 
provided to 

eligible students.
