CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 217  Networking 



Credits: 4



Co-requisites 

CS 170, CS 175



Description 

      Covers the fundamentals of network design and implementation, 
including cables and devices, widely used network protocols, and features 
and performances of network operating systems. The focus is on entry-level 
network support in a multi-level environment. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Identify and demonstrate use of basic features of networks

 Describe network hardware and software components.

 Research and discuss common network protocols and standards

 Explain how the Open Standards Inconnection model has evolved since its 
inception 

 Understand basic techniques and tools for configuring, managing, and 
troubleshooting networks, and explain how they can be applied to national 
and international business. 



Topical Outline

 An Introduction to Networking

 Networking Standards and the OSI Model

 Network Protocols

 Transmission Basics and Networking Media

 Physical and Logical Topologies

 Networking Hardware

 WANs and Remote Connectivity

 Network Operating Systems and Windows 2000-Based Networking

 NetWare-Based Networking

 Networking with UNIX

 Networking with TC/IP and the Internet

 Troubleshooting Network Problems

 Maintaining and Upgrading a Network

 Ensuring Integrity and Availability

 Network Security

 Implementing and Managing Networks





Texts

Dean, Network: Guide to Networks (w/CD for 2005 Network  Exam), 4th



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of  F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
