CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE



Course:  CS 112  Computer Science II



Credits: 4



Prerequisites 

CS 111 



Description 

      Introduces students to structured programming and problem solving 
using an object-oriented programming language. Algorithm development and 
basic problem solving techniques are introduced. Fundamental topics of 
computer programming including sequence, selection, repetition, 
input/output, functions, parameter passing, scope, lifetime, and arrays are 
discussed in detail. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Design, code, edit, run, and debug computer programs

 Demonstrate understanding of fundamentals data types

 Develop algorithms through the process of top-down, stepwise refinement

 Use selection structures to make decisions in a program

 Use repetition structures to execute statements in program repeatedly

 Demonstrate use of the various arithmetic, assignment and logical operators

 Construct modular programs using functions

 Write programs that pass information between functions

 Model data using one-and two-dimensional arrays.



Topical Outline

 Overview of a Personal Computer System

 Introduction to Control Structures

 Problem-Solving Process with a Programming Language

 Variables, Constants, and Arithmetic Operators

 Selection Structure

 Repetition Structure

 Value-Returning Functions

 Void Functions

 Arrays

 String Manipulation

 Sequential Access Files



Texts

      Java: An Intro to Problem Solving  Programming (w/Codekey) by Savitch, 
4th edition: Prentice Hall. 





Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers). 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
