CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 243  Web Security



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

None



Description 

      Designed to educate users in the technologies, terms, and process 
related to Internet security. Students are exposed to concepts and 
techniques related to general security, network security, operating system 
security, and methods for testing security. Both UNIX and Microsoft Windows 
operating systems are covered, providing a broad range of information 
essential for security. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand the major issues in network and computer system security, 
focusing mainly on threats from malicious software 

 Have and understanding of common attacks on computer networks and methods 
to detect and remediate such attacks 

 Be able to identify threats and vulnerabilities to information systems

 Be able to identify and detect data, computers, and networks exploits

 Be able to secure computer networks

 Be able to use network security tools.



Topical Outline

 Course Overview, Security Framework and Examples

 Access Control and Site Security

 TCP/IP Internetworking

 Attacks and Exploits: Lifecycle and Impact Assessment

 Advanced Network Architectures and Firewalls

 Operating Systems Security: Principles and Implementation

 Public and Private Key Cryptography

 Applications of Cryptographic Systems

 Database Systems Security: Principles and Implementation

 Network Security: Principles and Implementation

 Web Services Security: Principles and Implementation

 Intrusion Detection, Reporting, and Forensics

 Security Strategy: Policies, Planning, Implementation and Evaluation, 
Managerial and Ethical Issues: Monitoring, Reporting, and Information Use 

 Project Presentations and Security Competition Results





Texts

      Web Security for Network and System Administrators by Mackey: Thomson 
Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
