CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  CS 220  Marketing on the Internet



Credits: 3



Prerequisites 

None



Description 

      Introduces the student to important strategies for marketing products 
and services on the Internet. Web sites of businesses will be studied 
specifically for understanding what strategies are most effective in 
attracting business. Software and internet marketing techniques will be used 
to develop more effective Web sites. 



Learning Outcomes 

      After the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Create a successful Web Site

 Plan and analyze a Web Design

 Design and develop a Web Site

 Market a Web Site

 Understand the nature of a successful Web Site



Topical Outline

 The Web Economys Wild Ride

 Types of Web Sites

 Planning the Site

 Revenue and Advertising

 The Team: People Who Make the Site Happen

 Organizing Your Web Site with Navigation and Inline Graphics

 Testing Your Site for Maximum Performance

 Developing and Understanding the Brand

 Making Your Site Sticky

 Marketing Strategies for Web Sites

 More on Marketing: PR and Nontraditional Promotions

 Customer Service and Pulling it all Together



Texts

      Planning, Marketing  Developing Successful Websites by Miletsky: 
Thomson Course Technology. 



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 





Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
