            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

  Education  201

  Math/Science Tea Early Childhood Education

  Credits:     3

  Prerequisites:    3

  New Course   Spring



  Dr. Monica Heppel

  mheppelcccnj.edu

  ED 201 Math, Science and Technology in Early Childhood Education (3:2:1)

This course is designed for

  students working with children three through eight years of  age.  The

course prepares students to

  implement developmentally appropriate math and science activities with

young children and to select

  educational computer software for use in the early learning curriculum.











  COURSE OBJECTIVES

  Students will examine the sequence of beginning math concepts with

emphasis on problem-solving and

  logical thinking.   Students will explore the principles of the

scientific method of discovery, and

  demonstrate how to plan, integrate, and implement stimulating relevant

science experiments and activities

  appropriate for young children.  A major emphasis of this course is for

students to develop confidence and

   a positive perspective toward these areas of study in order to pass on

to young children a desire to

  discover their everyday environment.  Students will be expected to

develop an integrated unit of study

  and demonstrate concepts appropriate in each area.   Articulate the

sequence of beginning math concept

  learning demonstrate  appropriate individual ans small group math

activities demonstrate the scientific

  method of discovery design and implement appropriate science

experiments develop an appropriate,

  integrated unit of study in both math and science select appropriate

software for the ECE classroom

  which will supplement educational goals as stated in NJ ECE Program

Expectations develop strategies

  such as open ended questions, inquiry experiences, problem solving and

cooperative learning incorporate

  health and nutrition concepts into the science curriculum demonstrate

the ability to apply the project

  approach in scientific investigation select appropriate materials and

design centers for math/manipulative

  center and science discovery center exhibit appreciation of the natural

envirenment and confidence in

  teaching math and science concepts found in every day experiences

develop and maintain a resource

  notebook as a part os a preprofessional portfolio.



  TEXT:

  Math and Science for young Children.  By Charlesworth, R., and Lind, K.K.

(1999).  Nw York Delmar

  Publishers





  GRADE DETERMINANTS:







  CASE STUDIES:











  COURSE TOPICS

  (1) the brain of a baby, how your teqching techniques affect the

waychildren learn information (2) Science

   process skill observation activity (3) create a science/math activity

and lesson plans for 2 centers in a

  classroom (3) round table discussions of how activities facilitate

childrens learning and how it will benefit

  the children, teachers and parents (4) Continued discussion of the

project approavh with video (5)

  roundtable discussion of the project approach (6) students will review

computer software for children
