            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  IT 215  Historical Documentation Through CAD



Credits:  3 



Prerequisites

Enrollment by approval of instructor



Description

Students document historical structures in the county through field visits 
and convert the measured drawings into architectural prints using CAD. 



Learning Outcomes

At the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Understand and have the ability to measure existing structures and 
components 

 Understand and have the ability to convert field measurements to accurate 
AutoCAD documents 

 Understand and have the ability to accurately represent historic 
architectural components in AutoCAD. 

 Understand and demonstrate the ability to comply with Historic American 
Buildings Survey standards. 

 Understand and be able to compile a full set of HABS drawings





Topical Outline



 Field Measurements and Documenting a Historic Structure

 

 





Text

HABS/HAER Standards (downloadable.pdf document)  - no cost to students







Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 





Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of  F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note



      No cell phone usage or text messaging is permitted during class time. 
Use of the internet other than for class related activities is not 
permitted. 



If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If you  think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.8600, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible 





























IT 215MstSYL07r807
