            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE

Course: 	 IT 228 Engineering Technology Internship

Credits: 	3 (3:1:8)

Prerequisites 	EG 101 or permission of the Instructor

Description:
An internship is an integral part of engineering education. It provides real world experience in the profession; Enables correlation of class room learning with its application in industry; Broadens understanding of the types of employment available in the field; Helps students discover their individual interests; Builds resume credentials for the students; and develops relationships between Cumberland County College and local Industrial Firms

Learning Outcomes:
At the completion of this course, students should be able to:
1. Develop practical engineering skills and judgment 
2. Communicate effectively 
3. Discover their own interests within the field of Engineering Technology 
4. Build resume credentials to help them compete for full time positions upon graduation.

Course Requirements:

I. Requirements specified by the Career Services Office 
II. Amount of time at the job (note the minimum is 120 hours) 
i. Summer: 6 weeks at 20 hours per week 
ii. Fall or Spring: 6 weeks at 20 hours per week 
III. Course requirements: 
a. Bi-weekly progress reports via email: 
i. Brief discussion of ongoing assignment(s) 
ii. New assignment(s) 
iii. Problems- description and resolution 
b. Supervisor Evaluation: Your faculty advisor will be contacting your supervisor towards the end of your co-op experience to ask for an evaluation of your work either by email or phone. 
c. Final Report addressed to me with copy for your supervisor and the career services. The report should be 6 – 8 pages. At a minimum you need the following: 
i. Cover Page 
ii. Table of Contents 
iii. Abstract 
iv. Organization Overview 
v. Your job description and a list of specific responsibilities 
vi. Detailed description of some of your projects 
vii. Learning objectives and which were and were not met 
viii. Work experience analysis including: 
1. What courses did/did not help in your work 
2. What was learned on the job 
3. Comments regarding the internship experience 
4. Conclusion 
d. Oral Report – this is a PowerPoint presentation based on your final report and is usually given at the end of the seminar or the following semester to a class of students with a representative from Career Service office attending. 

Internship Grading 
Job performance evaluation by your supervisor 	20 Points 
Progress Reports 					30 Points
Final oral PowerPoint presentation 			20 Points
Final written report 					30 Points


Academic Integrity:
Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else without proper documentation.
Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental [ignorance of the proper rules for handling material is no excuse], plagiarism is, indeed, a “criminal” offense.
As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the discretion of the instructor.

Tutoring & Project Assist:
If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available through the Center for Academic & Student Success.  If you think that you might have a learning disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.8600 x 1282 for information on assistance that can be provided to eligible students.

Before Withdrawing From This Course:
If a student experiences adverse circumstances while enrolled in this course and considers withdrawing, s/he should see an advisor (division or advisement center) BEFORE withdrawing from the class.  A withdrawal may cause harmful repercussions to completion rate standards and overall GPA, which can limit or eliminate future financial aid in addition to causing academic suspension.


-----------------------------7e32fd101436--
