            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE

Course:	IT 116 Workplace Ethics

Credits:	1 (1:1:0)

Prerequisites:	None

Description: Students study human relations and professional development that exists in today’s rapidly changing world so that they become better prepared for living and working in a complex society.  Topics include co-worker mindfulness, timeliness, human relations, job acquisition, job retention, job advancement and professional image skills.

Learning Outcomes:

At the completion of this course, students will be able to:

? Communicate effectively
? Demonstrate cooperative teamwork skills
? Apply safety in the workplace
? Demonstrate responsible work ethics
? Learn effectively
? Develop a personal work plan
? Think critically and creatively

Topical Outline:

? Differentiate between a positive and negative work ethic 
? The 80/20 rule
? Develop problem solving guidelines
? Provide positive and critical feedback
? Apply communication techniques to enhance teamwork and personal performance
? Utilize the resources talent of team members
? Recognize Others’ contributions to project success


Text:

Hoffman, Edward G. & McCauley, Christopher J. Shop Reference for Students and Apprentices; Industrial Press; 2000; 2nd edition. ISBN: 978-0-831-13079-4. 


Hoffman, Peter; Hopewell, Eric; Janes, Brian and Sharp, Kent. Precision Machining Technology; Delmar Cengage; 2015, 2nd edition, ISBN: 978-1-285-44454-3.


Student Assessment:

Students’ evaluation in the subject will be based on 3 examinations, assignments, team projects and a final project.

Exams					20%
      Assignments				20%
Team Projects				20%
      Final Project				40%

Attendance:

Attendance is required.  Please see instructor for make-up policy for excused and school related absences.

Academic Integrity:

	Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else without proper documentation.

	Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental [ignorance of the proper rules for handling material is no excuse], plagiarism is, indeed, a “criminal” offense. As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the discretion of the instructor.

Tutoring & Project Assist:

	If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available through the Center for Academic & Student Success.  If you think that you might have a learning disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.8600 x 1282 for information on assistance that can be provided to eligible students.

Before Withdrawing From This Course:

If a student experiences adverse circumstances while enrolled in this course and considers withdrawing, s/he should see an advisor (division or advisement center) BEFORE withdrawing from the class.  A withdrawal may cause harmful repercussions to completion rate standards and overall GPA which can limit or eliminate future financial aid in addition to causing academic suspension.



