            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



Cumberland County College

Course Syllabus for College Algebra



MA 110M  College Algebra (3:3:0)



Brief Description:

Topics include polynomial, rational, other algebraic functions complex 
number system exponential and logarithmic functions and properties and 
graphs of functions.  This course is designed for students who may continue 
in math, science, technology or business related fields. 



Prerequisite: 

Successful completion of MA 105 or placement by CBSPT scores or placement by 
SAT score. 



General Objectives:

A. To provide the students with the algebraic abilities necessary to 
continue in the fields of engineering, mathematics, science, technology, and 
business related fields. 

B. To engage students in extensive algebraic problem solving.

C. To have students experience algebra through modeling real-world 
situations. 

D. To have students expand their algebraic reasoning skills.

E. To have students communicate about algebra both orally and in writing.

F. To have students use appropriate technology to enhance their 
understanding of algebra. 



Competency-based Objectives with Exit Criteria:

Upon successful completion of this course, the student should be able to 
demonstrate competency in the following areas: 

 Sketch graphs of equations.

 Find and use the slopes of lines to write and graph linear equations in two 
variables. 

 Evaluate functions and find their domains.

 Analyze graphs of functions.

 Identify and graph rigid and nonrigid transformations of functions.

 Find arithmetic combinations and compositions of functions.

 Find inverse functions graphically and algebraically.

 Sketch and analyze graphs of polynomial functions.

 Use long division and synthetic division to divide polynomials by other 
polynomials. 

 Perform operations with complex numbers.

 Determine the numbers or rational and real zeros of polynomial functions, 
and find the zeros. 

 Determine the domains of rational functions and find asymptotes of rational 
functions. 

 Sketch graphs of rational functions.

 Recognize and evaluate exponential and logarithmic functions.

 Graph exponential and logarithmic functions.

 Use the change-of-base formula to rewrite and evaluate logarithmic 
expressions. 

 Use properties of logarithms to evaluate, rewrite, expand, or condense 
logarithmic expressions. 

 Solve exponential and logarithmic equations.

 Use exponential growth models, exponential decay models, logistic growth 
models, and logarithmic to solve real-life problems. 

 Solve systems of equations by substitution, by elimination, and by 
graphing. 



Outline of Course Content and Suggested Time Schedule:

I. Review of fundamental concepts of algebra (1 hours)

Real numbers and their properties

Exponents and radicals

Polynomials and factoring

Graphical representation of data

II. Functions and their graphs (4 weeks)

Graphs of equations

Linear equations in two variables

Functions

Analyze graphs of functions

A library of functions

Shifting, reflecting, and stretching of graphs

Combinations of functions

Inverse functions

III. Polynomial and rational functions (4 weeks)

Quadratic functions

Polynomial functions of higher degree

Polynomial and synthetic division

Complex numbers

Zeros of polynomial functions

Rational functions

IV. Exponential and logarithmic functions (4 weeks)

Exponential functions and their graphs

Logarithmic functions and their graphs

Properties of logarithms

Exponential and logarithmic equations

Exponential and logarithmic models

V. Systems of equations (1 week)

Solving systems of equations

Two-variable linear systems



Instructional Methodologies:

Learning activities will be provided through lecture, discussion, problem 
solving, and group work. Students will be expected to work with appropriate 
technology work collaboratively use multiple approaches when solving 
problems, and communicate both orally and in writing.  Students will also be 
expected to attend all classes, take notes, read the related material in the 
book, study, and attempt to solve the assigned problems. 



Basic Materials for Students:

Textbook

Student Solution manual for textbook

Notebook or binder with paper

Graph paper

TI-83 or TI-83 plus calculator



Evaluation - Methods:  

A variety of forms of assessment will be used, which include but are not 
limited to, tests, quizzes, homework assignments, projects, calculator and 
computer labs.  A cumulative final exam will also be given.  Some 
consideration might be given to class participation and board work.  The 
following will be used to determine your grade: 

90-100A

80-89B

70-79C

60-69D

Below-60F



Attendance:  

Regular class attendance is of primary importance for success in 
Mathematics.  You will be permitted six hours absence.  Any absences after 
six hours may cause the student to be dropped from the course. 



Bibliography:

Larson, R.,  Hostetler, R. P. (2004). Precalculus (6th ed.). New York: 
Houghton Mifflin. 

Fall 2003

Page 1 of 2
