            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE





Course:  MA 111  Discrete Mathematics



Credits:  4 



Prerequisites  

MA 110 or permission from the instructor.



Description  

      Discrete Mathematics is designed to meet the needs not only of 
students majoring in computer science but of wider audience, especially 
students in mathematics and science. The course provides tools for formal 
reasoning as well as providing an early look at the connections between 
mathematics and computer science and the applications they generate. Topics 
include counting rules, prepositional and first-order logic, set theory, 
functions (with an emphasis on recursive functions), basic equivalence 
relations, algorithms, proofs, graphs and trees. An introduction to Boolean 
algebra and switching circuits is included. 



Learning Outcomes

At the completion of this course, students should be able to:

 Develop logic and problem solving skills through exposure to and 
constructing many different forms of proof and/or arguments 

 Develop an understanding of sets, relations, and functions

 Develop, perform and/or investigate an algorithm

 Develop strong computational skills for typical counting problems

 Evaluate and find the closed form for simple recurrence relations

 Develop an understanding of graph theory

 Develop an understanding of trees and their connection with search or 
sorting algorithms 

 Develop an understanding of Boolean Algebra and Combinatorial Circuits.



Topical Outline

 Prepositional  Predicate Logic

 Mathematical systems, proof and induction

 Sets, Sequences, Strings, Number Systems, Relations

 Equivalence Relations, Functions, Intro to Algorithms

 Notation for Algorithms and an example (Euclidean)

 Recursive Algorithms and Intro to Complexity

 Basic Counting methods and Mult / Add principles

 Binomial Coefficients and the pigeonhole principle

 Recurrence Relations

 Solving Rec. Rel., Analy of Algor by Worse/Average Case

 Basic Graph theory, cycles and paths

 Intro to Tree terminology and spanning trees

 Binary Trees, Decision trees Boolean Algebra, Combinatorial Circuits

 Synthesis of circuits, minimization problem and apps



Texts

Discrete Mathematics by Johnsonbaugh 6th edition: Prentice Hall.



Student Assessment

(Assessment may be accomplished through projects, portfolios, exams, 
presentations and/or papers) 



Academic Integrity

Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public 
speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else 
without proper documentation. 



Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental ignorance of the 
proper rules for handling material is no excuse, plagiarism is, indeed, a 
criminal offense. 

As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of 
ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Note

If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available 
through the Success Center.  If think that you might have a learning 
disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.1800, x282 for information on 
assistance that can be provided to eligible students. 
