            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



Cumberland County College

Course Syllabus for Intermediate Algebra



MA 105M  Intermediate Algebra (3:3:0)



Brief Description:

Intermediate Algebra is primarily for students who may continue in math, 
science, technology, or business-related fields.  Topics included are a 
review of basic algebra, rational exponents and radicals, first and second 
degree equations and inequalities, and systems of equations, functional 
relationship. 



Prerequisite:

Successful completion of MA 092 or MA 094 or MA098 or MA 099 or MA 100 or 
placement by CBSPT scores. 



General Objectives:

A. To provide the students with the basic algebraic abilities necessary to 
continue study in mathematics for the fields of engineering, mathematics, 
science, technology, and business related fields. 

B. To engage students in extensive algebraic problem solving.

C. To have students experience algebra through modeling real-world 
situations. 

D. To have students expand their algebraic reasoning skills.

E. To have students communicate about algebra both orally and in writing.

F. To have students use appropriate technology to enhance their 
understanding of algebra. 



Competency-based Objectives with Exit Criteria:

Upon successful completion of this course, the student should be able to 
demonstrate competency in the following areas: 

 Understand and work with the properties of Real and Complex numbers

 Perform operations with exponents, polynomials, and radicals

 Demonstrate an understanding of factoring

 Use algebraic techniques to simplify rational expressions

 Solve linear equations and inequalities, absolute value equations and 
inequalities, application problems and literal equations 

 Work with functional notation and draw graphs

 Solve quadratic equations and systems of equations



Outline of Course Content and Suggested Time Schedule

I. Review of basic algebraic concepts (1 hour)

Sets of numbers and interval notation

Operations on real numbers

Simplifying expressions

Linear equations in one variable

Applications of linear equations in one variable

Literal equations and applications to geometry

Linear inequalities in one variable

II. Linear equations in two and three variables (6 hours)

Linear equations in two variables

Slope of a line

Equations of a line

Applications of linear equations and graphing

Systems of linear equations in two equations

Applications of systems of linear equations in two variables

Systems of linear equations in three equations

III. Introduction to relations and functions (3 hours)

Introduction to relations

Instruction to functions

Graphs of basic functions

Additional topics on functions

Variation

I. Polynomials (5 hours)

Properties of integer exponents and scientific notation

Polynomial functions and applications

Addition and subtraction of polynomials

Multiplication of polynomials

Division of polynomials

Synthetic division

IV. Radicals and complex numbers (7 hours)

Definition of an nth root

Rational exponents

Properties of radicals

Addition and subtraction of radicals

Multiplication and subtraction of radicals

Multiplication or radicals

Rationalization

Radical equations

Complex numbers

V. Factoring and quadratic functions (4 hours)

Greatest common factor and factor by grouping

Factoring trinomials

Factoring binomials

Zero product rule

Completing the square and the square root property

Quadratic formula

Equations in quadratic form

VI. Quadratic functions and nonlinear systems (2 hours)

Graphs of quadratic functions

Applications of quadratic functions

Distance formula

VII. Rational expressions (6 hours)

Introduction to rational functions

Multiplication and division of rational expressions

Addition and subtraction of rational expressions

Complex fractions

Rational equations

Application of rational equations and proportions

VIII. More equations and inequalities (4 hours)

Compound inequalities

Polynomial and rational inequalities

Absolute value equation

Absolute value inequalities

Linear inequalities in two variables



Instructional Methodologies:

Learning activities will be provided through lecture, discussion, problem 
solving, and group work. Students will be expected to work with appropriate 
technology work collaboratively use multiple approaches when solving 
problems, and communicate both orally and in writing.  Students will also be 
expected to attend all classes, take notes, read the related material in the 
book, study, and attempt to solve the assigned problems. 



Basic Materials for Students:

Textbook

Student Solution manual for textbook

Notebook or binder with paper

Graph paper

TI-83 or TI-83 plus calculator



Evaluation - Methods:  

A variety of forms of assessment will be used, which include but are not 
limited to, tests, quizzes, homework assignments, projects, calculator and 
computer labs.  A cumulative final exam will also be given.  Some 
consideration might be given to class participation and board work.  The 
following will be used to determine your grade: 



90-100A

80-89B

70-79C

60-69D

Below-60F



Attendance:  

Regular class attendance is of primary importance for success in 
Mathematics.  You will be permitted six hours absence.  Any absences after 
six hours may cause the student to be dropped from the course. 



Bibliography:

Miller, J.,  ONeill, M. (2004). Intermediate Algebra (1st ed.). New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 





Fall 2003

Page 1 of 3
