            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



Cumberland County College

Syllabus for Differential Equations



MATH 220 - Differential Equations (4:4:0)



Brief Description:

Topics include first order differential equations, higher order linear 
equations with constant and variable coefficients, solutions by infinite 
series, Laplace transforms and numerical methods.  Other topics include 
existence and uniqueness theorems, phase plane and equilibrium points as 
well as modeling many real world problems by using differential equations. 



Prerequisite: 

MA201 or MA 210.



General Objectives:

A. Develop an appreciation of the history of Differential Equations and the 
role it has played in mathematics and other disciplines. 

B. Learn to use symbolic notation correctly and appropriately.

C. To increase the students mastery of the deductive nature of reasoning.

D. To increase the students ability in problem solving.

E. Use modeling techniques to show applications involving first order, 
second order, and systems of differential equations. 

F. To increase the students ability to work with others towards a common 
goal. 

G. Use technology to solve problems, communicate solutions and explore 
options. 



Competency-Based Objectives with Exit Criteria:

Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to demonstrate 
competency in the following areas: 

 Basic knowledge and terminology

a. Classify differential equations in terms of ordinary or partial, order 
and linearity. 

b. Verify a solution by substitution into the differential equation.

c. Determine whether a first order linear initial valueproblem has a unique 
solution over a given interval. 

d. Apply initial conditions to a general solution to find a unique solution.

e. Determine a differential equation for a variety of application problems 
by applying modeling methods. 

 First-Order Differential Equations

Apply directional fields to visualize the family of solutions to a first 
order differential equation. 

a. Recognize an autonomous differential equation, find its critical points 
and classify them as attractors, repellers or unstable. 

b. Recognize a separable differential equation and solve by separating 
variables. 

c. Recognize a linear differential equation and solve by using an 
integrating factor. 

d. Recognize an exact differential equation by using partial derivatives and 
solve by partial integration. 

e. Recognize homogeneous and Bernoulli differential equations and solve by 
substitution. 

 Numerical methods

a. Apply Eulers method to estimate points on a solution curve for first 
order initial value problems. 

b. Apply Improved Eulers method to estimate points on a solution curve for 
first order initial value problems. 

c. Apply Runge-Kutta method to estimate points on a solution curve for first 
order initial value problems. 

d. Use computer software to estimate solution curves.

 Modeling with first order differential equations

a. Solve exponential growth/decay problems.

b. Solve Newtons law of cooling problems.

c. Solve mixture problems.

d. Solve logistic growth problems.

e. Solve basic dynamics problems.

f. Solve basic fluid flow problems.

g. Set up a system of differential equations to model Predator-Prey and 
mixture problems. 

 Higher order differential equations.

a. Determine if an initial value problem has a unique solution for an nth 
order linear differential equation. 

b. Determine if a set of solutions to a homogeneous linear differential 
equation are linearly independent. 

c. Define the Wronskian and use it to determine if a set of solutions to a 
homogeneous linear differential equation are linearly independent. 

d. Define the concept of a fundamental set of solutions, and how it relates 
to the general solution. 

e. Explain the form of the solution of a nonhomogeneous linear differential 
equation. 

f. Given one solution to a second order homogeneous linear differential 
equation, use reduction of order to find a second solution. 

g. Find the general solution of a homogeneous linear differential equation 
with constant coefficients based on the roots of the auxiliary equation. 

h. Apply the method of undetermined coefficients to find a particular 
solution to a nonhomogeneous linear differential equation with constant 
coefficients with an appropriate driving function. 

i. Apply variation of parameters to find a particular solution.

j. Identify and solve a Cauchy-Euler differential equation.

k. Solve a system of linear differential equations by using differential 
operators and elimination. 

 Modeling with higher-order differential equations

a. Explain the terms free undamped, free damped and driven motion for a 
spring/mass system. 

b. Explain the terms overdamped, critically damped and underdamped 
oscillation for a free damped spring/mass system. 

c. Explain the terms steady state solution, transient solution and pure 
resonance for a driven spring/mass system. 

d. Solve a variety of spring/mass system problems.

 Series solutions of linear equations

a. Determine if a given point is an ordinary, regular singular, or irregular 
singular point for a second order linear differential equation with 
polynomial coefficients. 

b. Find the first several terms in each of two linearly independent power 
series solutions for a given ordinary point. Determine the radius of 
convergence based on the singular points. 

c. Find the first several terms in each of two linearly independent 
Frobenius series solutions for a given regular singular point. 

d. Solve Bessels equation using Bessel functions of the first and second 
kind. 

 Laplace Transforms

a. State the definition of a Laplace Transform, and use the definition to 
calculate the transform of simple functions. 

b. Use tables and general properties of Laplace Transforms to find the 
transform of a given function. 

c. Use tables and general properties of Inverse Laplace Transforms to 
inverse of a Laplace Transform. 

d. Use Laplace Transforms to solve a nonhomegeneous second-order IVP.

e. Use the Laplace Transform to solve a system of differential equations.



Outline of Course Content and Suggested Time Schedule:

I. Differential Equations and their Solutions. (4 hours) 

1. Classification of Differential Equations.

2. Solutions of Differential Equations.

3. Initial-value problems and existence uniqueness for firstorder initial 
value problems. 

4. Modeling applications as Differential Equations.

II. Solving First-Order Differential Equations. (8 hours)

1. Separable equations.

2. Exact differential equations.

3. First order linear equations by variation of parameters an and by 
integration factors. 

4. Solutions by substitution and Homogeneous equations.

5. Bernoulli differential equations.

III. Numerical Methods Of Approximating The Solution Of First Order 
Differential Equations. (5 hours) 

1. Direction Fields.

2. Eulers Method.

3. Improved Eulers Method.

4. Runge-Kutta Method.

IV. Modeling with First-Order Differential Equations.(6 hours)

1. Newtons law of cooling, mixture and dynamics.

2. Logistic, flow rates and velocity.

3. Systems of linear and nonlinear differential equations.

a) Combined mixture problems.

b) Predator-Prey models.

c) Numerical estimation of solution curves.

V. Higher-Order Differential Equations (12 hours)

1. Terminology and preliminary theory. 

2. Linear independence and a general solution.

3. Reduction of order.

4. Solving homogeneous linear equations with constant coefficients.

5. Undetermined coefficients.

6. Variation of Parameters.

7. Cauchy-Euler equation.

8. Solving systems of linear equations.

VI. Modeling With Higher-Order Differential Equations (6 hours)

1. Undamped vibration system

2. Damped vibration system.

3. Driven motion.

4. Nonlinear equations.

5. Diabetes and a Glucose Tolerance Test.

VII. Infinite Series Solutions (6 hours)

1. Review of Power series.

2. Power series solutions.

3. Method of Frobenius.

VIII. The Laplace Transform. (4 hours)

1. Definition and general properties.

2. Inverse transform and the transform of a derivative.

3. Using to solve initial value problems.

4. Solving systems of linear equations.



Instructional Methodologies:

Learning activities will be provided through lecture, discussion, problem 
solving, and group work. Students will be expected to work with appropriate 
technology work collaboratively use multiple approaches when solving 
problems, and communicate both orally and in writing.  Students will also be 
expected to attend all classes, take notes, read the related material in the 
book, study, and attempt to solve the assigned problems.  A TI-92 will also 
be provided and all students will be required to use the TI-92 graphics 
calculator. All students wil be required to spend time in the computer lab 
to complete hand in assignments working with DERIVE. 



Basic Materials for Students:

Textbook

Student Solution manual for textbook

Notebook or binder with paper

Graph paper

TI-83 or TI-83 plus calculator



Evaluation - Methods:  

A variety of forms of assessment will be used, which include but are not 
limited to, tests, quizzes, homework assignments, projects, calculator and 
computer labs.  A cumulative final exam will also be given.  Some 
consideration might be given to class participation and board work.  The 
following will be used to determine your grade: 

91-100A

81-90B

71-80C

61-70D

Below-61F



Attendance:

Students are expected to attend all classes and be there on time.  If for 
some reason a student misses a class, it is their obligation to catch up on 
the work missed.  If a student misses more than 8 hours of class and has 
below a C average the student will be dropped from the class.  If a student 
misses more than 10 hours of class they may be dropped from the class no 
matter what their grade.  No warning will be given before instituting this 
policy. 



Bibliography:

Zill,D. (2001).A First Course in Differential Equations (7th ed.). 
Calfornia: Brooks/Cole Publishing 







Fall 2003

Page 1 of 4





-----------------------------105871865726559--
