            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



Cumberland County College

Course Syllabus for College Trigonometry



MA 120M  College Trigonometry (3:3:0)



Brief Description:

A continuation of MA 110.  Topics included are angular measure, 
trigonometric functions, identities and equations, curve sketching, inverse 
trigonometric functions, applications on right triangles, oblique triangles, 
vectors, complex numbers, and polar coordinates. This course is designed for 
students who may continue in math, science, technology or business related 
fields. 



Prerequisite:

MA101 or MA 110 or placement by CBSPT scores.



General Objectives:

A. To provide the student with the trigonometry necessary to continue in the 
fields of engineering, mathematics, science, technology, and business 
related fields. 

B. To engage students in extensive trigonometric problem solving.

C. To have students experience trigonometry topics through modeling 
real-world situations. 

D. To have students expand their reasoning skills.

E. To have students communicate about trigonometric topics both orally and 
in writing. 

F. To have students use appropriate technology to enhance their 
understanding of trigonometry topics. 



Competency-Based Objectives with Exit Criteria:

Upon successful completion of this course, the student should be able to 
demonstrate competency in the following areas: 

 Describe angles

 Use radian and degree measure

 Use angles and trigonometric functions to model and solve real-life 
problems 

 Evaluate trigonometric functions using a unit circle, acute angles, or any 
number 

 Use the domain and period to evaluate the sine and cosine functions

 Use a calculator to evaluate trigonometric functions

 Use the fundamental trigonometric identities

 Use reference angles to evaluate trigonometric functions

 Sketch graphs of the trigonometric functions

 Evaluate inverse trigonometric functions

 Evaluate the composition of trigonometric functions

 Recognize and write the fundamental trigonometric identities

 Use the fundamental trigonometric identities to evaluate trigonometric 
functions, simplify trigonometric expressions, and rewrite trigonometric 
expressions 

 Verify trigonometric identities

 Solve trigonometric equations

 Use sum and difference formulas to evaluate trigonometric functions, verify 
identities, and solve trigonometric equations 

 Use multiple-angle, power-reducing, half-angle, product-to-sum, and 
sum-to-product formulas to rewrite and evaluate trigonometric 

 Use the law of sines and cosines to solve oblique triangles and model 
real-life problems 

 Find the areas of oblique triangles

 Recognize a conic as the intersection of a plane and double-napped cone

 Write the standard form of the equation of the conics

 Use the properties of conics to solve real-life problems

 Evaluate a set of parametric equations for a given value of the parameter

 Sketch a curve that is represented by a set of parametric equations

 Rewrite a set of parametric equations as a single rectangular equation

 Find a set of parametric equations for a graph

 Plot points on the polar coordinate system

 Convert points and equations from rectangular to polar form

Outline of Course content and Suggested time Schedule:

I. Trigonometry (7 weeks)

Radian and degree measure

Trigonometric functions: The unit circle

Right triangle trigonometry

Trigonometry functions of any angle

Graphs of sine and cosine functions

Graphs of other trigonometric functions

Applications and models

II. Analytic trigonometry (4 weeks)

Using fundamental identities

Verifying trigonometric identities

Solving trigonometric equations

Sum and difference formulas

Multiple-angle and product-to-sum formulas

III. Additional topics in trigonometry (1 week)

Law of sines

Law of cosines

IV. Topics in analytic geometric (2 week)

Introduction to conics: Parabolas

Ellipses

Hyperbolas

Parametric equations

Polar coordinates



Instructional Methodologies:

Learning activities will be provided through lecture, discussion, problem 
solving, and group work. Students will be expected to work with appropriate 
technology work collaboratively use multiple approaches when solving 
problems, and communicate both orally and in writing.  Students will also be 
expected to attend all classes, take notes, read the related material in the 
book, study, and attempt to solve the assigned problems. 



Basic Materials for Students:

Textbook

Student Solution manual for textbook

Notebook or binder with paper

Graph paper

TI-83 or TI-83 plus calculator



Evaluation - Methods:  

A variety of forms of assessment will be used, which include but are not 
limited to, tests, quizzes, homework assignments, projects, calculator and 
computer labs.  A cumulative final exam will also be given.  Some 
consideration might be given to class participation and board work.  The 
following will be used to determine your grade: 

90-100A

80-89B

70-79C

60-69D

Below-60F



Attendance:  

Regular class attendance is of primary importance for success in 
Mathematics.  You will be permitted six hours absence.  Any absences after 
six hours may cause the student to be dropped from the course. 



Bibliography:

Larson, R.,  Hostetler, R. P. (2004). Precalculus (6th ed.). New York: 
Houghton Mifflin. 





Fall 2003

Page 1 of 3
