            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



Cumberland County College

Syllabus for Calculus I



MA 130M - Calculus I (4:4:0)



Brief Description:

Topics include limits continuity and differentiation techniques for 
algebraic, trigonometric, natural logarithms/exponentials.  The define 
integral and the anti-derivative are linked by the Fundamental theorem of 
Calculus.  Numerical methods such as Newtons method as well as Trapezoidal 
and Simpsons rule will be explored. Theory is augmented by application from 
a variety of disciplines. 



Prerequisite:

MA102 or MA 120 or MA 121 or placement by CBSPT scores.



General Objectives:

A. Understand the concepts of Calculus through graphical means.

B. Develop clear communication of mathematical concepts and ideas.

C. Knowledge of mathematical definitions  theorems.

D. Recognize and use different function representations.

E. Mathematical modeling.

F. Top-down methodology to break a problem into sub-problems.

G. Symbolic manipulation.

H. Use technology.

I. Approximation and estimation.



Competency-Based Objectives with Exit Criteria:

Upon successful completion of this course, the student should be able to 
demonstrate competency in the following areas: 

 Functions

a. Express/Evaluate a function explicitly and implicitly.

b. Add/Subtract/Multiply/Divide and use compositions

c. Describe domain  range

d. Classify as algebraic/transcendental

e. Use in mathematical models

f. Find absolute/relative extrema, influx points

g. Find intervals where increasing/decreasing.

h. Find intervals where concave up/down.

 Graphing

a. Draw a representative graph to model phenomena.

b. Use graphs to infer function behavior.

c. Locate points on a graph satisfying certain requirements about 
continuity/limits/derivatives. 

d. Describe a graph (function rule not needed) satisfying certain 
requirements about continuity/limits/derivatives. 

e. Visually describe the meaning of all critical theorems/ideas in Calculus 
through a graphical picture. 

 Limits

a. Explore limits numerically, graphically and analytically.

b. State informal definitions of one and two sided limits

c. Use Limit laws to evaluate simple limits

d. Use various techniques to evaluate limits

e. State definition of Continuity and express continuity on an interval in 
terms of a graph. 

f. Describe/provide examples of the forms of discontinuity.

 Derivatives

a. Describe, evaluate and relate rates of change.

b. State definition of the derivative of a function.

c. Evaluate derivative of algebraic functions by definition.

d. Evaluate derivatives of algebraic, trigonometric, logarithmic and 
exponential functions through rules. 

e. Find equation of tangent/secant lines.

f. Use 1st/2nd Derivative Tests

g. Use Newtons method/differentials to approximate values.

 Summation  Integration

a. Evaluate Basic Anti-derivative through rules.

b. Evaluate Anti-derivatives through variable substitution and pattern 
recognition. 

c. Use  simplify summation notation.

d. State the definition of a definite integral.

e. Evaluate definite integral by definition/graphical means.

f. Evaluate definite integral through the fundamental theorem of calculus 
and properties of definite integrals. 

 Critical Theorems

a. State the intermediate value theorem and its use in:

i. The test point method in solving inequalities.

ii. The existence and finding solutions to equations.

iii. The implicit graphic understanding of continuity.

b. State the extreme value theorem and its use in:

i. The existence and finding solutions to global and local extrema 
applications. 

c. State the mean value theorem and its use in:

i. The relationship between average and instantaneous rates of change.

ii. The criteria for increasing/decreasing functions.

iii. The describing functions with the same derivative.

d. State the fundamental theorem of calculus and its use in:

i. Evaluating definite integrals.

ii. Defining the natural logarithm.

 Transcendental Functions

a. Define, evaluate, and differentiate logarithms, and exponentials 
functions. 

b. Provide a sketch of their graphs.

c. State their domain, range and asymptotic behavior.

d. Identify common integration forms which result in these transcendental 
functions. 

e. Perform logarithmic differentiation



Outline of Course Content and Suggested Time Schedule:

Total for course: 56 hours (14 weeks  4 hrs a week)

I. Review graphing and functions.  (4 hours)

1. Graphs and their properties.

2. Linear models and Rates of Change

3. Functions.

a) Definition of a function and ways to represent them.

b) Finding the domain and range.

c) Notation and operations.

II. Limits and Continuity. (8 hours)

1. Limit of a function.

a) Properties of limits.

b) Techniques for evaluating.

c) One sided and infinite limits.

d) Delta, epsilon definition of a limit.

2. Continuity.

a) Definition of continuity at a point.

b) Theorems on continuity.

III. The derivative.  (8 hours)

1. Slope of a curve at a point.

2. Definition of the derivative of a function.

3. Derivative formulas.

4. Derivative of an implicit function.

5. Higher order derivatives.

IV. Applications of the derivative.(12 hours)

1. Curve sketching.

a) Increasing and decreasing functions.

b) Relative maxima and minima.

i. First derivative test.

ii. Second derivative test.

c) Concavity and points of inflection.

d) Rolles and Mean-value theorem.

2. Maxima and Minima applications.

3. Related rates.

4. One-dimensional kinematics.

5. The differential and its applications.

V. Anti-differentiation / definite integral. (10 hours)

1. Area under a curve.

2. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

3. Basic integration techniques  u-substitution

4. Numerical integration.

5. Applications of the integral.

VI. Introduction to Logarithms (6 hours)

1. Definition and properties of natural logarithm

2. Logarithmic differentiation

3. Natural Logarithm  Integration

4. Inverses

5. Definition and properties of natural exponential

6. Derivatives and Integration

VII. Tests (6 hours)

1. Three test

VIII. Review/Make Up time (2 hours)



Instructional Methodologies:

Learning activities will be provided through lecture, discussion, problem 
solving, and group work. Students will be expected to work with appropriate 
technology work collaboratively use multiple approaches when solving 
problems, and communicate both orally and in writing.  Students will also be 
expected to attend all classes, take notes, read the related material in the 
book, study, and attempt to solve the assigned problems.  All students will 
be required to spend time in the computer lab to complete hand in 
assignments working with DERIVE. 



Basic Materials for Students:

Textbook

Student Solution manual for textbook

Notebook or binder with paper

Graph paper

TI-83 or TI-83 plus calculator



Evaluation - Methods:  

A variety of forms of assessment will be used, which include but are not 
limited to, tests, quizzes, homework assignments, projects, calculator and 
computer labs.  A cumulative final exam will also be given.  Some 
consideration might be given to class participation and board work.  The 
following will be used to determine your grade: 

91-100A

81-90B

71-80C

61-70D

Below-61F



Attendance:

Students are expected to attend all classes and be there on time.  If for 
some reason a student misses a class, it is their obligation to catch up on 
the work missed.  If a student misses more than 8 hours of class and has 
below a C average the student will be dropped from the class.  If a student 
misses more than 10 hours of class they may be dropped from the class no 
matter what their grade.  No warning will be given before instituting this 
policy. 



Bibliography:

Larson, R., Hostetler, R. P.,  Edwards, B. H. (2002). Calculus (7th ed.). 
New York: Houghton Mifflin 









Fall 2002

Page 1 of 4
