            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



 Cumberland County College

Syllabus for Calculus II



MA 140M Calculus II (4:4:0)



Brief Description:

A continuation of MA 130.  Topics include a further development of 
exponential and logarithmic functions, inverse trigonometric functions, 
hyperbolic and inverse hyperbolic functions integration techniques 
indeterminant forms, LHospitals rule and improper integrals and infinite 
sequence and series. Theory is augmented by applications from a variety of 
disciplines. 



Prerequisite: 

MA103 or MA 130



General Objectives:

A. Understand concepts of Calculus through graphical means

B. Develop clear communication of mathematical concepts and ideas

C. Knowledge of mathematical definitions  theorems

D. Mathematical modeling

E. Top-down methodology to break a problem into sub-problems.

F. Symbolic manipulation

G. Using technology

H. Approximation and estimation

I. Techniques of integration

J. Applications of the definite integral

K. Convergence  function representation by infinite series.



Competency-Based Objectives:

Upon successful completion of this course, the student should be able to 
demonstrate competency in the following areas: 

 Transcendental Functions

a. Define, evaluate, and differentiate logarithms, exponentials, inverse 
trigonometric functions and hyperbolic functions 

b. Provide a sketch of their graphs.

c. State their domain, range and asymptotic behavior.

d. Identify common integration forms which result in these transcendental 
functions. 

e. Perform logarithmic differentiation.

 Differential Equations

a. Translate physical law/phenomena such as Newtons law of cooling in terms 
of a differential equation with initial conditions. 

b. Solve separable differential equations with initial conditions.

c. State the solution to the growth/decay model and use it in applications.

 Applications of Integration

a. Find the area between two functions over an interval.

b. Find the arc length of function over an interval.

c. Find the surface area and volume of a region rotated about either axis.

d. Compute the amount of work needed to move an object over a distance with 
a done in compressing/stretching springs. 

e. Calculating work, density of lamina, or centers of mass.

 Techniques of integration

a. Integrate using trigonometric substitution, integration by parts, partial 
fraction decomposition, and the integration tables. 

b. Rewrite integrands such as using trigonometric identities, completing the 
square, long division and other symbolic manipulations. 

c. Integrate products/quotients of powers of trigonometric functions.

d. Evaluate integrals over unbounded intervals.

 Limits

a. Recognize and rewrite indeterminate forms.

b. Use LHopitals rule to evaluate expressions with a indeterminate form.

 Sequences and Series

a. Define the convergence of a sequence or series.

b. State the bounded-monotonic sequence theorem.

c. Determine the convergence/divergence of a series through the nth term 
divergence test, integral test, comparison tests, alternating series test, 
ratio test, and the root test. 

d. Approximate the sum of a series, and approximate the lower bound on the 
number of terms needed in the series to attain a maximum error in the 
approximation. 

e. Use a Taylor series rewrite functions as power series.

f. State Taylors theorem with remainder.

g. Use the binomial theorem  other techniques to find the power series 
expansion of functions. 

h. Determine the radius of convergence.



Outline of Course Content and Suggested Time Schedule:

I. Review (2 hours)

1. Riemann sums and the Definite Integral.

2. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

3. Integration by substitution.

4. Numerical integration.

a) Trapezoidal and Simpsons Rule.

b) Error analysis and Computer programs.

II. Logarithmic and Exponential Functions (14 hours)

1. Review definition and properties of logarithms.

2. The natural logarithmic function.

a) Definition and its properties.

b) Definition of e as the base of 1n x.

c) Differentiation and applications.

d) Log rule for integration.

3. The inverse of a function.

a) Definition and its properties.

4. The exponential function.

a) Definition and its properties.

b) Differentiation and integration.

5. Bases other than e.

a) Definition of exponential and logarithmic functions to base a.

b) Differentiation and Integration.

c) Representing e as a limit.

6. Growth and decay applications.

7. Newtons law a cooling applications.

8. Inverse trig functions.

a) Definitions and properties.

b) Differentiation and applications.

c) Integrals involving inverse trig functions.

9. Hyperbolic functions.

a) Definitions and identities.

b) Differentiation and applications.

c) Inverse hyperbolic functions and their derivatives.

III. Applications of the definite integral (6 hours)

1. Area between curves.

2. Volume of revolution.

3. Arc length and surface of revolution.

4. Center of mass.

IV. Techniques of Integration (10 hours)

1. Integration by parts.

2. Integration by partial fractions.

3. Integrals involving powers of sin and cos.

4. Integration by trig substitution.

V. LHopitals rule, Improper integrals (2 hours)

VI. Infinite series (14 hours)

1. Sequences

2. Series and Convergence.

3. Tests for convergence and divergence.

4. Taylor Series  interval of convergence

5. Other methods to find power series representations.

6. Applications of infinite series.



Instructional Methodologies:

Learning activities will be provided through lecture, discussion, problem 
solving, and group work. Students will be expected to work with appropriate 
technology work collaboratively use multiple approaches when solving 
problems, and communicate both orally and in writing.  Students will also be 
expected to attend all classes, take notes, read the related material in the 
book, study, and attempt to solve the assigned problems.  All students will 
be required to spend time in the computer lab to complete hand in 
assignments working with DERIVE. 



Basic Materials for Students:

Textbook

Student Solution manual for textbook

Notebook or binder with paper

Graph paper

TI-83 or TI-83 plus calculator



Evaluation - Methods:  

A variety of forms of assessment will be used, which include but are not 
limited to, tests, quizzes, homework assignments, projects, calculator and 
computer labs.  A cumulative final exam will also be given.  Some 
consideration might be given to class participation and board work.  The 
following will be used to determine your grade: 

91-100A

81-90B

71-80C

61-70D

Below-61F



Attendance policy:

Students are expected to attend all classes and be there on time.  If for 
some reason a student misses a class, it is their obligation to catch up on 
the work missed.  If a student misses more than 8 hours of class and has 
below a C average the student will be dropped from the class.  If a student 
misses more than 10 hours of class they may be dropped from the class no 
matter what their grade.  No warning will be given before instituting this 
policy. 



Bibliography:

Larson, R., Hostetler, R. P.,  Edwards, B. H. (2002). Calculus (7th ed.). 
New York: Houghton Mifflin 







Fall 2002

Page 1 of 3
