            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

CUMBERLAND COUNTY COLLEGE

Course:	MA 125 Calculus Fundamentals I

Credits:	3 (3:3:0)

Prerequisites:	MA 120 Trigonometry

Description: Intended for students who are not in Science or in Engineering.  An introduction to differential and integral calculus of a single variable. 

Learning Outcomes:

At the completion of this course, students will be able to:

? Define and determine limits.  
? Find the derivative of function from the limit definition
? Find derivatives of products, quotients, and composite functions
? Interpret the derivative as a rate of chance
? Evaluate definite integrals using basic integration formulas and by substitution

Topical Outline:

? The Limit of a Function
? Calculating Limits using Limit Laws
? Limits involving Infinity
? Derivatives and Rates of Change
? The Derivative as a Function
? Derivatives of Polynomials and Exponential Functions
? Product and Quotient Rules
? Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions
? Chain Rule
? Implicit Differentiation
? Derivatives of Log Functions
? Related Rates
? Max and Min Values
? Derivatives and Shapes of Curves
? Indeterminate forms and L’Hopital’s Rule
? Optimization Problem
? Antiderivatices
? Areas and Distances
? The Definite Integral
? Evaluating Definite Integrals
? The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus


Text:

Stewart. Calculus: Concepts and Contexts bundled w/ WebAssign; Cengage;  2013; 4th edition. ISBN: 978-0-495-55742-5. 


Student Assessment:

Students’ evaluation in the subject will be based on 3 examinations, assignments, team projects and a final project.

3 Exams				40%
      Assignments				10%
      Quizzes				10%
      Final Exam				40%

Attendance:

Attendance is required.  Please see instructor for make-up policy for excused and school related absences.

Academic Integrity:

	Plagiarism is cheating.  Plagiarism is presenting in written work, in public speaking, and in oral reports the ideas or exact words of someone else without proper documentation.

	Whether the act of plagiarism is deliberate or accidental [ignorance of the proper rules for handling material is no excuse], plagiarism is, indeed, a “criminal” offense. As such, a plagiarized paper or report automatically receives a grade of ZERO and the student may receive a grade of F for the semester at the discretion of the instructor.

Tutoring & Project Assist:

	If you are having difficulty with work in this class tutoring is available through the Center for Academic & Student Success.  If you think that you might have a learning disability, contact Project Assist at 856.691.8600 x 1282 for information on assistance that can be provided to eligible students.

Before Withdrawing From This Course:

If a student experiences adverse circumstances while enrolled in this course and considers withdrawing, s/he should see an advisor (division or advisement center) BEFORE withdrawing from the class.  A withdrawal may cause harmful repercussions to completion rate standards and overall GPA which can limit or eliminate future financial aid in addition to causing academic suspension.



