            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



Cumberland County College

Course Syllabus for Mathematical Structures and Algorithms



MA 115M - Mathematical Structures and Algorithms (3:3:0)



Brief Description: 

A problem solving approach will be used to explore fundamental concepts of 
various numeration systems operations on natural numbers, whole numbers, and 
integers number theory fraction models and operations the real number system 
patterns and functions.  The student will be required to monitor and reflect 
on the process of problem solving, develop and evaluate arguments and 
proofs, communicate mathematical ideas coherently and clearly, understand 
how mathematical ideas connect and build on one another, and be able to 
translate among representations to solve problems.  This course is 
appropriate for those students preparing to be early childhood, elementary, 
and special education teachers. 



Prerequisite: 

Successful completion of MA092, MA094, MA98, MA99, or MA100 or placement by 
CBSPT score or by SAT score. 



General Objectives:

A. To build new mathematical knowledge through problem solving.

B. To develop an understanding of various numeration systems.

C. To develop an understanding of the operations on natural numbers, whole 
numbers, and integers. 

D. To develop an understanding of number theory.

E. To develop an understanding of fraction models and operations.

F. To develop an understanding of the real number system.

G. To develop an understanding of patterns and functions.



Competency-Based Objectives with Exit Criteria:

Upon successful completion of this course, the student should be able to 
demonstrate competency in the following areas: 

 Know how to solve problems working systematically using various strategies, 
set theory, and logical reasoning. 

 Represent a number in various numeration systems represent a number in 
various bases convert a numeral to and from base ten and perform arithmetic 
operations with numerals in bases other than ten. 

 Determine what properties hold for a set of numbers classify word problems 
by operation type perform arithmetic operations with integers and determine 
why particular algorithms work. 

 Find all the factors of a number write the prime factorization of a number 
classify a number by the number of its factors test whether one number is 
divisible by another number find the greatest common factor and least common 
multiple of two or more numbers perform modular arithmetic and prove an idea 
geometrically. 

 Recognize equivalent fractions model fractions with region, linear, and set 
models model operations with fractions simplify fractions and find a number 
between two other numbers. 

 Represent quantities as a ratio solve proportions represent numbers in 
decimal notation convert fractions to and from decimals represent quantities 
as percents and perform operations with decimals and percents. 

 Identify functional relationships from tables, graphs, and symbols generate 
output values when given input values identify a rule for a function from a 
table or a graph determine the domain and range for a function use 
properties to solve equations for a variable and find rate of change for a 
function from a table, a graph, or an equation. 



Outline of Course Content and Suggested Time Schedule:

I. Problem solving  (2.5 weeks)

II. Numeration  (1.5 weeks)

Numeration systems

Understanding place value through different bases

III. Operations on natural numbers, whole numbers, and integers  (2 weeks)

Natural numbers, whole numbers, integers, and their properties

Operations with whole numbers

Operations with integers

Algorithms

IV. Number theory  (2 weeks)

Primes, composites, and prime factorization

Divisibility

Modular arithmetic

Representation of number-theory ideas

V. Fraction models and operations  (2 weeks)

Three fractions to represent fractions

Using the region model of fractions

Using the linear model of fractions

Using the set model of fractions

Operations with fractions

VI. Real numbers: Rational and irrationals  (2 weeks)

Ratio and proportion

A fourth way to represent fractions

A fifth way to represent fractions

Exploring irrational numbers

VII. Patterns and functions  (2 weeks)

Variables

Patterns

Iteration

Functions and equation



Instructional Methodologies:

1. Classroom activities:  This course uses a problems-based approach to 
develop essential understanding of mathematical concepts and procedures. 

2. Assignments: Problems, journal entries, projects, and readings will be 
assigned to reinforce topics covered in the classroom and provide a means 
for reflection. 

3. Class participation and attendance:  All students must be prepared and 
participate in class every day.  Students are expected to participate in 
problem solving activities and discussions.  Students will be expected to 
work individually and in groups. 

4. Test: Tests will be given. The tests will be closed book/notes and will 
test assigned readings, problems, and material discussed in class. 



Basic Materials for Students:

Textbooks

One inch (1) binder to hold and organize papers.

TI-30X IIS calculator



Evaluation - Methods:

The total amount of points earned in the course will be compared to the 
total maximum possible points.  Letter grades will be determined using a 
standard percentage point evaluation as outlined below. 

A: 90-100

B: 80-89

C 70-79

D: 60-69

         F: Below 60



Attendance:  

Regular class attendance is of primary importance for success in 
Mathematics.  You will be permitted six hours absence.  Any absences after 
six hours may cause the student to be dropped from the course. 



Bibliography:

Masingila, J. O., Lester, F. K.,  Raymond, A. M. (2002).  Mathematics for 
elementary teachers via problem solving: Student activity manual. New 
Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 

Masingila, J. O., Lester, F. K.,  Raymond, A. M. (2002).  Mathematics for 
elementary teachers via problem solving: Student resource book. New Jersey: 
Prentice-Hall. 



Fall 2003

Page 1 of 3
