            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

2



                   GLOUCESTER COUNTY COLLEGE

              Business and Technologies Division



                        COURSE SYLLABUS







                                             Fall      2002

                                             SEMESTER/YEAR





CIS 261                            Database Management

COURSE CODE                        COURSE TITLE





                        2                                    2

3

LECTURE/RECITATI ON HOURS          CREDITS





Enhanced  Guide to Oracle 8i        Joline Morrison  and  Mike

Morrison

TITLE OF TEXT                      AUTHOR





                                   Course Technology

                                   PUBLISHER





15   Weeks

LENGTH OF SEMESTER                 INSTRUCTOR









CATALOG DESCRIPTION:



This  course provides the methodology for developing  database

applications  using  the Oracle relational  database  and  the

Oracle  Developer.   The  course  includes  creating  database

tables, inserting, updating, deleting and retrieving data  and

records,  including  study  of the Oracle  large  object  data

types.   Students will study the Oracle Developer application,

which includes Form Builder, Report Builder, Graphics Builder,

and Project Builder.



PREREQUISITES:   CIS 210 or permission by Chairperson  of  the

Business and Technology

                                  Division









261

PURPOSE OF THE COURSE:



This  course  provides  a comprehensive study  and  procedural

guide  for developing database applications using the  current

Oracle   relational   database  and  the   current   Developer

application development utilities.



OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE:



1.     To  provide  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  sound

   database design applications and development techniques using

   current  Oracle  database software,  including  the  Oracle

   Developer package.



2.    To provide real-world considerations, using case studies

   and tutorials, for creating and managing realistic database

   development  projects  using current Oracle-based  database

   software.



SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:



After completing this course, the student will be able to:



1.    Understand  the Oracle SQL commands used to  create  and

   mange  database  tables and to insert, update,  and  delete

   database records.

2.   Understand how to use SQL commands to retrieve data from

an Oracle relational database.

3.   Learn how to create PL/SQL programs and named program

units that are stored in the database and in the workstation

file system.

4.   Learn how to use the current version of Developer

utilities (Form Builder, Report Builder, Graphics Builder, and

Project Builder) to create an integrated database application.

5.   Develop  project applications for databases that  contain

     large data sets.

6.   Become familiar with the object-oriented features in Form

   Builder and create reusable form objects.

POLICIES OF THE COURSE:



 1.GCC Attendance Policy:



   There  is  significant  value  in  the  daily,  cumulative,

   educational  growth that results from regular participation

   in  class.   This is especially true where ideas, concepts,

   points  of  view,  social development,  poise,  confidence,

   knowledge  and  success  derive  from  the  interaction  of

   students and faculty.



   Therefore,  students  are  expected  to  attend  all  class

   sessions  for  which they are scheduled.   Students  attain

   maximum  academic benefit through regular class attendance.

   The   effect  of  absences  on  student  grades   will   be

   determined by each instructor, consistent with his  or  her

   stated policy provided in course outlines.



 2.Instructors Attendance Policy:



   Daily  attendance  is  required of  all  students.   Exams,

   quizzes  and  labs  missed may not be made  up,  except  in

   cases of prolonged illness or other conditions approved  by

   the   instructor  prior  to  the  class(es)  being  missed.

   Students  absent from class are responsible  for  obtaining

   materials missed.



   WARNING:   The  information discussed in  the  lectures  is

   cumulative  in  nature  therefore,  excessive  absenteeism

   leads  to  a point where it will be impossible for  you  to

   successfully  complete  this  course  with  a  transferable

   grade.



   A  penalty  will be assessed to the students final  letter

   grade for excessive absences as follows:

                 of Absences       Penalty

                         4          1 grade level

                                         5           2   grade

   levels

                                         6           3   grade

   levels

                                         7           4   grade

   levels

                                                             8

   5 grade levels

                                         9           6   grade

   levels

                              10 or more       grade of F



METHOD OF EVALUATION:



   Three  (3)  exams  worth 100 points each  and  several  lab

   projects  worth 200 points will be used in determining  the

   students final grade.  The following point breakdown  will

   be used in determining the final letter grade:



   Lab   Projects                                          200

   points                           401-500           A

   3   exams  worth  100  pts.  each               300  points

   301-400           B

                                                500     points

   201-300           C

                                                       101-200

   D

                                          100-below F

MISSED WORK:



   All  work  must  be  submitted at the  announced  deadline,

   which unless stated otherwise, will be at the beginning  of

   class on the announced date.



   As  a  general  rule,  work  submitted  late  will  not  be

   accepted.   Tests  or  assignments  may  not  be   made-up.

   However,   if   you  think  you  have  a   sufficient   and

   documentable  reason to warrant an exception to  the  rule,

   see  the  instructor  immediately  after  the  absence   to

   discuss the situation.



 SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR AUDIT:



   If  a  student wishes to attend a class regularly but  does

   not  wish  to  receive a grade or credit, the  student  may

   choose  to  audit  the  course.  For  this  to  occur,  the

   student  must  first  register  for  the  course,  pay  the

   tuition and any fees, and then switch to audit status.



   Audits  are not accepted unless an Audit Form is  completed

   by   the  student  and  course  instructor  and  officially

   approved  by  the  Director  of Student  Development.   All

   audit  enrollments must occur during the first  half  of  a

   semester  or its equivalent.  Once the auditor is enrolled,

   the  course  cannot be changed to credit.   The  instructor

   will  determine the conditions of the audit  to  which  the

   student  must  adhere  in order to receive  an  R  grade,

   signifying  successful completion of  the  audit.   If  the

   student  fails  to  meet  the conditions,  a  W  will  be

   assigned, signifying audit withdrawal.



 INCOMPLETE GRADE:



   A  grade  of incomplete (I) may be reported for  a  student

   who  has  carried a course with a passing grade  until  the

   end  of  the semester, but due to illness or other  unusual

   and  substantiated cause has been unable  to  complete  the

   final examination or some limited amount of assigned work.



   The  student and faculty member must complete the  Student

   Contract  for  Incomplete form prior to  a  grade  of  I

   being  given.   Any incomplete not removed by  the  end  of

   this period automatically becomes an F.



 WITHDRAWALS:



   A student wishing to withdraw from a course or the

   College, should formally complete all withdrawal

   procedures at the Student Development Office prior to the

   announced end of the withdrawal period (the end of the

   10th week of a regular semester or two-thirds through

   shorter semesters.).



   A student who officially withdraws from a course will

   receive a W grade which will not affect the students

   GPA.  Withdrawal is not permitted after the withdrawal

   period.





 OFFICE HOURS:



   Your  instructors  office hours  will  be  posted  by  his

   office  door in the College Center.  You are encouraged  to

   take advantage of this time.

   Your instructors e-mail address is

   and the office phone is 415-



INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS:



    Enhanced Guide to Oracle 8i, by Joline Morrison and Mike

Morrison



 ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:



   Honesty  and  the  scholarly pursuit  of  truth  are  basic

   precepts of academic integrity and are fundamental to  this

   course  and College.  As a member of the College community,

   you  have the responsibility to maintain academic integrity

   and  to  conduct yourself in a manner consistent  with  the

   Colleges policy on Student Conduct, which is found in  the

   Student  Handbook.   Accordingly, you are  expected  to  do

   your  own  work and not to give or receive assistance  with

   your work unless directed to do so by the instructor.    To

   do otherwise would constitute academic dishonesty.



   Academic  dishonesty is a serious offense and will  not  be

   tolerated.   It  may include, but is not  limited  to,  the

   following violations.



                Cheating  -  (i.e.,  the use  of  unauthorized

       materials,   information,  or  aid  in   the   learning

       process.)



                Collaboration  -  (i.e., unauthorized  working

       with others to complete work)

                Fabrication - (i.e., submitting an  untruthful

       statement or the resubmitting of returned academic work

       without prior permission)



                Plagiarism  - (i.e., submitting  the  work  of

       others  as  ones  original work  or  failure  to  cite

       sources of information used)



               Tampering With Testing or Grades



   College  sanctions  for  violations  are  outlined  in  the

   Student  Handbook.   Penalties in the course  for  academic

   dishonesty  may range from a reprimand to failure  for  the

   course.



   It  is  your  responsibility  to  bring  knowledge  of  any

   violations  of academic integrity to the attention  of  the

   instructor.

                OUTLINE OF LEARNING ACTIVITIES

                               

                                                      Text

Week                                               Chapters



     1     Client/Server  and  relational  database  concepts.

1

        The Case Study Databases:

               The Clearwater Trading Sales Order Database

    The Northwoods University Student

           Registration Database

           

   2    Creating and Modifying Database Objects              2

            User Accounts and System Privileges

            Database Table Definitions and Data Type

            Viewing Information About Tables



   3    Using Oracle to Add, View and Update Data            3

            Inserting Data into Tables

            Retrieving Data from a Single Table

            Oracle SQL Group Functions

            Joining Multiple Tables

            Database Views



   4    Introduction to PL/SQL                         4-5

            Basics of PL/SQL Programming

            Writing and Executing a PL/SQL Program

            PL/SQL Selective Structures

                  The IF/THEN Structure

            Using SQL Commands in PL/SQL Programs

            PL/SQL Tables and Tables of Records

            Advanced PL/SQL Programming Concepts



   5    Creating Oracle Data Block Forms                6

            Using a Data Block Form

            Creating the Custom Form

            Creating a Form Based on Database View

            Creating a Multiple Table Form

            Creating a List of Values (LOV)



   6    EXAM I



   7    Creating Custom Forms                           7

            Form Triggers

            Default System Messages

            Creating a Relationship Between Data Block

               and a Control Block

            Tab and Stacked Canvases



  8     Advanced Form Builder Topics                    8

            Creating Image Items to Display Graphic Images

            Creating Sound Items

            Form Builder Mouse Operations

            Controlling Data Block Relationships



   9    Using Report Builder                            9

            The Report Builder Object Navigation Wonder

            Report Templates

            Report Components

            Components of a Master Detail Report

            Creating and Using Report Parameters



 10     Using Graphics Builder                         10

            Creating Pie Chart

            Creating a Column Chart

            Creating a Form with an Embedded Chart

            Creating a Report with an Embedded Chart



 11     Creating an Integrated Database Application - Lesson A

11

            Designing an Integrated Database Application

            Creating a Splash Screen

            Opening, Closing and Navigating to Forms in

                Multiple-Form Applications



 12     EXAM - Case Study I Report Deadline



 13     Creating an Integrated Database Application - Lesson B

11

            Creating Projects in Project Builder

            The Project Builder Environment

            Using Project Builder to Manage Project Components

            Delivering a Project

            Customizing the Project Builder Environment

        Lesson C

            Creating Custom Pull-down Menus

            Menu Item Preparation

            Creating a Menu Toolbar

            Implementing Menu Security

            Controlling Menu Items Programmatically



    14        Form   Builder   Objects   and   Flexible   Code

12

            Object Oriented Principles

            Inheriting Object Properties for Property Classes

            Storing Reusable Objects in Object Groups

            Storing Reusable Objects in Object Libraries

            Storing Reusable PL/SQL Code in PL/SQL Libraries



 15     EXAM III - Case Study II Report Deadline
