            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

2



                   GLOUCESTER COUNTY COLLEGE

              Business and Technologies Division



                        COURSE SYLLABUS





                                             Fall      2002

                                             SEMESTER/YEAR





CIS     262                        ADVANCED DATABASE MANAGEMENT

COURSE CODE                        COURSE TITLE





2/2                                3

LECTURE/RECITATION HOURS           CREDITS





Database  Systems                    Rob, Peter  and  Coronel,

Carlos

TITLE OF TEXT                      AUTHOR(S)





                                   Course Technology

                                   PUBLISHER





15   Weeks

LENGTH OF SEMESTER                 INSTRUCTOR







CATALOG DESCRIPTION:



This course provides an in-depth study of the management and

administration of database systems.  Students will study

topics such as transaction management and concurrency control,

distributed database management systems, data warehousing and

client/server systems.  Students will study the internets

impact on Database design.  The course will cover the various

management and technical responsibilities of a typical

Database Administration.  In studying these responsibilities,

various Oracle Database tools will be used, such as the Oracle

Storage Manager, the Oracle Security Manager, and the Oracle

Instance Manager.



PREREQUISITE:  CIS 261 or permission by Chairperson of the

Business and Technology

                               Division





262

PURPOSE OF THE COURSE:



The  purpose  of  this  course is to teach  advanced  database

concepts building upon the first database concepts course  and

advancing   the  students  knowledge  and  understanding   of

database concepts.



OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE:



 1.Provide  a thorough understanding of database transactions,

   executing, concurrency control, and overall management.



 2.Provide  a  thorough understanding of distributed  database

   management systems.



 3.Provide   a   thorough   understanding   of   client/server

   computing.



 4.Provide an understanding of data warehousing.



 5.Provide an understanding of Internet database and the  Web-

   to-database transaction process.



 6.Understand the role of database administrator.



SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:



After completing this course, the student will be able to:



 1.Understand  database  transactions and  the  importance  of

   executing and managing transactions.



 2.Understand   concurrency   control,   the   management   of

   concurrent transaction execution.



 3.Understand  distributed database management system  (DDBMS)

   and its components.



 4.Understand   the   basic  concepts  of  a   object-oriented

   database management system.



 5.Understand  client/server computing,  the  components,  and

   the effect on the database management system.



 6.Understand data warehousing.



 7.Understand database design and implementation issues for e-

   commerce.



 8.Understand how internet databases are typically used.



 9.Understand the architectures of Web-to-database middleware



10.Understand  how  the  database has important  technological

   management and cultural organizational consequences.

POLICIES OF THE COURSE:



 1.GCC Attendance Policy:



   There  is  significant  value  in  the  daily,  cumulative,

   educational  growth that results from regular participation

   in  class.   This is especially true where ideas, concepts,

   points  of  view,  social development,  poise,  confidence,

   knowledge  and  success  derive  from  the  interaction  of

   students and faculty.



   Therefore,  students  are  expected  to  attend  all  class

   sessions  for  which they are scheduled.   Students  attain

   maximum  academic benefit through regular class attendance.

   The   effect  of  absences  on  student  grades   will   be

   determined by each instructor  consistent with his  or  her

   stated policy provided in course outlines.



 2.Instructors Attendance Policy:



   Daily  attendance  is  required of  all  students.   Exams,

   quizzes  and  labs  missed may not be made  up,  except  in

   cases of prolonged illness or other conditions approved  by

   the   instructor  prior  to  the  class(es)  being  missed.

   Students  absent from class are responsible  for  obtaining

   materials missed.



   WARNING:   The  information discussed in  the  lectures  is

   cumulative  in  nature  therefore,  excessive  absenteeism

   leads  to  a point where it will be impossible for  you  to

   successfully  complete  this  course  with  a  transferable

   grade.



   A  penalty  will be assessed to the students final  letter

   grade for excessive absences as follows:

                 of Absences       Penalty



                         4          1 grade level

                                         5           2   grade

   levels

                                         6           3   grade

   levels

                                         7           4   grade

   levels

                                                             8

   5 grade levels

                                         9           6   grade

   levels

                              10 or more       grade of F



METHOD OF EVALUATION:



Your grades will be computed as follows:



                25      Exam I

                25      Exam II

                25      Exam III

                15      DBA Report

                10      Class Participation



MISSED WORK:



   All  work  must  be  submitted at the  announced  deadline,

   which unless stated otherwise, will be at the beginning  of

   class on the announced date.



   As  a  general  rule,  work  submitted  late  will  not  be

   accepted.   Tests  or  assignments  may  not  be   made-up.

   However,   if   you  think  you  have  a   sufficient   and

   documentable  reason to warrant an exception to  the  rule,

   see  the  instructor  immediately  after  the  absence   to

   discuss the situation.



 SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR AUDIT:



   If  a  student wishes to attend a class regularly but  does

   not  wish  to  receive a grade or credit, the  student  may

   choose  to  audit  the  course.  For  this  to  occur,  the

   student  must  first  register  for  the  course,  pay  the

   tuition and any fees, and then switch to audit status.



   Audits  are not accepted unless an Audit Form is  completed

   by   the  student  and  course  instructor  and  officially

   approved  by  the  Director  of Student  Development.   All

   audit  enrollments must occur during the first  half  of  a

   semester  or its equivalent.  Once the auditor is enrolled,

   the  course  cannot be changed to credit.   The  instructor

   will  determine the conditions of the audit  to  which  the

   student  must  adhere  in order to receive  an  R  grade,

   signifying  successful completion of  the  audit.   If  the

   student  fails  to  meet  the conditions,  a  W  will  be

   assigned, signifying audit withdrawal.



 INCOMPLETE GRADE:



   A  grade  of incomplete (I) may be reported for  a  student

   who  has  carried a course with a passing grade  until  the

   end  of  the semester, but due to illness or other  unusual

   and  substantiated cause has been unable  to  complete  the

   final examination or some limited amount of assigned work.



   The  student and faculty member must complete the  Student

   Contract  for  Incomplete form prior to  a  grade  of  I

   being  given.   Any incomplete not removed by  the  end  of

   this period automatically becomes an F.



WITHDRAWALS:



   A student wishing to withdraw from a course or the

   College, should formally complete all withdrawal

   procedures at the Student Development Office prior to the

   announced end of the withdrawal period (the end of the

   10th week of a regular semester or two-thirds through

   shorter semesters.).



   A student who officially withdraws from a course will

   receive a W grade which will not affect the students

   GPA.  Withdrawal is not permitted after the withdrawal

   period.



OFFICE HOURS:



   Your  instructors  office hours  will  be  posted  by  his

   office  door in the College Center.  You are encouraged  to

   take advantage of this time.

   Your instructors e-mail address is

   and the office phone is 415-



INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS:



   Database Systems, by Rob, Peter and Coronel, Carlos.



 ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:



   Honesty  and  the  scholarly pursuit  of  truth  are  basic

   precepts of academic integrity and are fundamental to  this

   course  and College.  As a member of the College community,

   you  have the responsibility to maintain academic integrity

   and  to  conduct yourself in a manner consistent  with  the

   Colleges policy on Student Conduct, which is found in  the

   Student  Handbook.   Accordingly, you are  expected  to  do

   your  own  work and not to give or receive assistance  with

   your work unless directed to do so by the instructor.    To

   do otherwise would constitute academic dishonesty.



   Academic  dishonesty is a serious offense and will  not  be

   tolerated.   It  may include, but is not  limited  to,  the

   following violations.



                Cheating  -  (i.e.,  the use  of  unauthorized

       materials,   information,  or  aid  in   the   learning

       process.)



                Collaboration  -  (i.e., unauthorized  working

       with others to complete work)

                Fabrication - (i.e., submitting an  untruthful

       statement or the resubmitting of returned academic work

       without prior permission)



                Plagiarism  - (i.e., submitting  the  work  of

       others  as  ones  original work  or  failure  to  cite

       sources of information used)



               Tampering With Testing or Grades

   

   College  sanctions  for  violations  are  outlined  in  the

   Student  Handbook.   Penalties in the course  for  academic

   dishonesty  may range from a reprimand to failure  for  the

   course.



   It  is  your  responsibility  to  bring  knowledge  of  any

   violations  of academic integrity to the attention  of  the

   instructor.

                OUTLINE OF LEARNING ACTIVITIES

                               

                                                      Text

Week                                               Chapters



    1       Transaction  Management  Transaction  Properties

9

        Transaction Management with SQL Evaluating

        Transaction Results



  2     Concurrency Control                              9

        Uncommitted Data Concurrency Control with

        Locking Methods Concurrency Control with

        Time Staying Methods Database Recovery

        Management



     3        Distributed    Database   Management    Systems

10

        DDBMS Advantages and Disadvantages DDBMS

        Components and Levels of Data and Process

        Distribution



     4        Distributed   Database   Transparency   Features

10

        Performance Transparency and Query Optimization

        Distributed Database Design Data Fragmentation



    5       New   Developments:    Object-Oriented   Databases

11

        Object Orientation and ITs Benefits

        Object-Oriented Concepts Objects Components

        and Characteristics Object Identity Messages and

        Methods Classes Protocol Object-Classification



   6      Characteristics  of an Object-Oriented  Data  Model

11

        Object Schemes Graphical Representation of

        Objects Class-Subclass DDM and previous Data

        Models Similarities and Differences of Object-

        Oriented Database Management Systems DDBMS

        Advantages and Disadvantages How DD Concepts

        Have Influenced the Related Models The next

        Generation of Database Management System



  7     EXAM I



  8     Chart/Server Systems                             12

        Forces that drive the trend to Client/Server Systems

        Managerial Expectations of Client/Server Systems/

        Client/Server Architecture Client/Server Databases

        Client/Server Architectural Styles Client/Server

        Implementation Issues

  9     The Data Warehouses                             13

        Need for Data Analyses Decision Support Systems

        The Data Warehouse Rules that Define a Data

        Warehouse Online Analytical Processing



10       Star  Schemes  Facts Dimensions,  Attributes,  Data

13

        Warehouse Implementation Apply Database Design

        Procedures, Data Memory



11      Exam II



12      Databases in Electronic Commerce                14

        The Impact of E-Commerce E-Commerce Benefits

        E-Commerce Styles E-Commerce Architecture

        Security Payment Processing Digital Cash Credit

        Card Processing Database Design for E-Commerce

        Applications Extensible Marking Language (XML)



13      Web Database Development                        15

        Internet Technologies and Databases Typical

        Uses of Internet Databases Web-to-Database

        Middlemen:  Server Side Extensions Web Browsers,

        Using a Web-to-Database Production Tool:  Cold

        Fusion How Cold Fusion Works



14      Database Administration                         16

        The need for and Role of Databases in An Organization

        The Database Environments Human Component

        DBAs Managerial Role DBAs Technical Role

        Database Administrator Tools the DBA at Work:

        Using Oracle for Database Administration.  Oracle

          Database  Administration  Tools  Creating   a   New

Database

        Managing Users and Establishing Security.



15      Exam III - Database Administrator Report is due





-----------------------------7d32ee91106a8--
