            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

6



                   GLOUCESTER COUNTY COLLEGE

              Business and Technologies Division



                        COURSE SYLLABUS







                                             Fall      2002

                                             SEMESTER/YEAR







CIS  161                             Structured Query Language

(SQL)

COURSE CODE                        COURSE TITLE





                        2                                    2

3

LECTURE/RECITATI ON HOURS          CREDITS





A Guide to SQL                     Philip J. Pratt

TITLE OF TEXT                      AUTHOR





                                   Course Technology

                                   PUBLISHER





15   Weeks

LENGTH OF SEMESTER                 INSTRUCTOR







CATALOG DESCRIPTION:



Structured Query Language (SQL) is a command language that  is

used  in  many database management systems.  Students will  be

working  with  an  Oracle  Database in  this  course.   Topics

covered  include using SQL to create tables, write queries  on

single  and  multiple tables, update data,  data  types,   and

overall database administration and reporting.  Students  will

learn how to create basic and complex reports based upon  data

in a table or view.



PREREQUISITE:  CIS 110 or CIS 111 or permission by Chairperson

of the Business and

                               Technology Division







161

PURPOSE OF THE COURSE:



It  is  the purpose of this course to provide an understanding

of  Structured  Query  Language and to  provide  students  the

opportunity to use Structured Query Language.



OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE:



 1.To  have  students understand how to use  SQL  commands  to

   query a database.



 2.To   have   students  learn  the  database   administration

   features of SQL



SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:



After completing this course, the student will be able to:



  1.   Create and run SQL commands to create tables, use  data

types and add rows to tables.



 2.  Use SQL commands to query a database.



  3.   Use  SQL  commands to update table data and  to  create

tables.



  4.   Understand and use the database administration features

of SQL.



  5.  To create basic and complex reports based upon data in a

table or view.





POLICIES OF THE COURSE:



 1.GCC Attendance Policy:



   There  is  significant  value  in  the  daily,  cumulative,

   educational  growth that results from regular participation

   in  class.   This is especially true where ideas, concepts,

   points  of  view,  social development,  poise,  confidence,

   knowledge  and  success  derive  from  the  interaction  of

   students and faculty.



   Therefore,  students  are  expected  to  attend  all  class

   sessions  for  which they are scheduled.   Students  attain

   maximum  academic benefit through regular class attendance.

   The   effect  of  absences  on  student  grades   will   be

   determined by each instructor, consistent with his  or  her

   stated policy provided in course outlines.



 2.Instructors Attendance Policy:



   Daily  attendance  is  required of  all  students.   Exams,

   quizzes  and  labs  missed may not be made  up,  except  in

   cases of prolonged illness or other conditions approved  by

   the   instructor  prior  to  the  class(es)  being  missed.

   Students  absent from class are responsible  for  obtaining

   materials missed.



   WARNING:   The  information discussed in  the  lectures  is

   cumulative  in  nature  therefore,  excessive  absenteeism

   leads  to  a point where it will be impossible for  you  to

   successfully  complete  this  course  with  a  transferable

   grade.



   A  penalty  will be assessed to the students final  letter

   grade for excessive absences as follows:

                 of Absences       Penalty

                         4          1 grade level

                                         5           2   grade

   levels

                                         6           3   grade

   levels

                                         7           4   grade

   levels

                                                             8

   5 grade levels

                                         9           6   grade

   levels

                              10 or more       grade of F



METHOD OF EVALUATION:



   Three  (3)  exams  worth 100 points each  and  several  lab

   projects  worth 200 points will be used in determining  the

   students final grade.  The following point breakdown  will

   be used in determining the final letter grade:



   Lab   Projects                                          200

   points                           401-500           A

   3   exams  worth  100  pts.  each               300  points

   301-400           B

                                                500     points

   201-300           C

                                                       101-200

   D

                                          100-below F

MISSED WORK:



   All  work  must  be  submitted at the  announced  deadline,

   which unless stated otherwise, will be at the beginning  of

   class on the announced date.



   As  a  general  rule,  work  submitted  late  will  not  be

   accepted.   Tests  or  assignments  may  not  be   made-up.

   However,   if   you  think  you  have  a   sufficient   and

   documentable  reason to warrant an exception to  the  rule,

   see  the  instructor  immediately  after  the  absence   to

   discuss the situation.



 SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR AUDIT:



   If  a  student wishes to attend a class regularly but  does

   not  wish  to  receive a grade or credit, the  student  may

   choose  to  audit  the  course.  For  this  to  occur,  the

   student  must  first  register  for  the  course,  pay  the

   tuition and any fees, and then switch to audit status.



   Audits  are not accepted unless an Audit Form is  completed

   by   the  student  and  course  instructor  and  officially

   approved  by  the  Director  of Student  Development.   All

   audit  enrollments must occur during the first  half  of  a

   semester  or its equivalent.  Once the auditor is enrolled,

   the  course  cannot be changed to credit.   The  instructor

   will  determine the conditions of the audit  to  which  the

   student  must  adhere  in order to receive  an  R  grade,

   signifying  successful completion of  the  audit.   If  the

   student  fails  to  meet  the conditions,  a  W  will  be

   assigned, signifying audit withdrawal.



 INCOMPLETE GRADE:



   A  grade  of incomplete (I) may be reported for  a  student

   who  has  carried a course with a passing grade  until  the

   end  of  the semester, but due to illness or other  unusual

   and  substantiated cause has been unable  to  complete  the

   final examination or some limited amount of assigned work.



   The  student and faculty member must complete the  Student

   Contract  for  Incomplete form prior to  a  grade  of  I

   being  given.   Any incomplete not removed by  the  end  of

   this period automatically becomes an F.



 WITHDRAWALS:



   A student wishing to withdraw from a course or the

   College, should formally complete all withdrawal

   procedures at the Student Development Office prior to the

   announced end of the withdrawal period (the end of the

   10th week of a regular semester or two-thirds through

   shorter semesters.).



   A student who officially withdraws from a course will

   receive a W grade which will not affect the students

   GPA.  Withdrawal is not permitted after the withdrawal

   period.



                               



OFFICE HOURS:



   Your  instructors  office hours  will  be  posted  by  his

   office  door in the College Center.  You are encouraged  to

   take advantage of this time.

   Your instructors e-mail address is

   and the office phone is 415-



INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS:



   A Guide to SQL, by Philip J. Pratt



 ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:



   Honesty  and  the  scholarly pursuit  of  truth  are  basic

   precepts of academic integrity and are fundamental to  this

   course  and College.  As a member of the College community,

   you  have the responsibility to maintain academic integrity

   and  to  conduct yourself in a manner consistent  with  the

   Colleges policy on Student Conduct, which is found in  the

   Student  Handbook.   Accordingly, you are  expected  to  do

   your  own  work and not to give or receive assistance  with

   your work unless directed to do so by the instructor.    To

   do otherwise would constitute academic dishonesty.



   Academic  dishonesty is a serious offense and will  not  be

   tolerated.   It  may include, but is not  limited  to,  the

   following violations.



                Cheating  -  (i.e.,  the use  of  unauthorized

       materials,   information,  or  aid  in   the   learning

       process.)



                Collaboration  -  (i.e., unauthorized  working

       with others to complete work)

                Fabrication - (i.e., submitting an  untruthful

       statement or the resubmitting of returned academic work

       without prior permission)



                Plagiarism  - (i.e., submitting  the  work  of

       others  as  ones  original work  or  failure  to  cite

       sources of information used)



               Tampering With Testing or Grades



   College  sanctions  for  violations  are  outlined  in  the

   Student  Handbook.   Penalties in the course  for  academic

   dishonesty  may range from a reprimand to failure  for  the

   course.



   It  is  your  responsibility  to  bring  knowledge  of  any

   violations  of academic integrity to the attention  of  the

   instructor.

                OUTLINE OF LEARNING ACTIVITIES

                               

                                                      Text

Week                                               Chapters



     1      Introduction   to   SQL   and   Database   Systems

1



   2    Create and run SQL commands to create tables, use

        data types and add rows to table                  2



    3-4   Using  SQL  commands  to  query  a  database,  under

3

        simple and compound conditions.  Problem solving

        exercises



     5    Completion  of querying a database  by  discussing

4

         and  demonstrating queries that join  more  than  one

table.



     6  Exam I - Lab projects due



      7-8                                  Study and  use  the

commands to update table data.                   5

        Study how to create a new table from an existing

        table and how to change the structure of a table.



      9-10                                 Study the  database

features of SQL, including the                  6

        use of views granting and revoking database

        privileges to users dropping and using an index

        using and obtaining information from system catalog

        and using integrity constraints to control data entry.



     11 Exam II - Lab project due



      12-13                                Study how to create

basic and complex reports based                  7

        on data in a table or view.  Study how to concentrate

        data, create a view for a report, change report column

         headings and formats,  and add report titles.   Study

how

         to  calculate totals and subtotals in  a  report  and

group data.

        Topics of scripting and spooling are discussed.



      14  Study  embedding  SQL  commands  with  a  procedural

8

        language.  Discussion of the use of embedded SQL to

        insert more rows and change and delete existing rows,

        including a discussion of how to retrieve single rows.

        Using embedded commands and how to use cursors

        to retrieve multiple rows.



     15 Exam II - Final Lab project due
