            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                         Gloucester County College

                             Business Studies

                                     

                CIS-107:    Concepts of Information Systems

                                SPRING 2004

      

Instructor:          Barbara D. Turner                           email:

BTurnergccnj.edu

Office:   College Center - c159                                  phone:

856.415.2297

     office hours posted on office door or by appointment

COURSE DESCRIPTION

     This  first  course  for  CIS, CIT, and other  computer  majors,  will

     present the fundamental concepts of Information Systems (IS). Students

     will gain an understanding of todays IS concepts and techniques in  a

     business context with a managerial emphasis.



PREREQUISITES:

     None



TEXTBOOK(s):



     There are 3 textbooks for this course:

          

          Fundamentals of Information Systems - SECOND EDITION

          Ralph M. Stair, George W. Reynolds

          Course Technology - 2003 - ISBN 0-619-06491-9

          

          Problem-Solving Cases in Microsoft Access and Excel

          Joseph A. Brady, Ellen F. Monk

          Course Technology - 2003 - ISBN 0-619-15904-9

          

          Microsoft Windows XP - Introductory Concepts  Techniques

          Shelly, Cashman, Forsyth

          Course Technology - 2002 - ISBN 0-7895-6418-1

          

               NOTE: The GCC Bookstore has these textbooks available.

               They are bundled together into a single package.



COURSE OBJECTIVES

  The objective of this course address the major role of information t

  technology in providing organizations with strategic advantage by

  facilitating problem solving, increasing productivity and quality,

  improving customer service, and enabling business process reengineering.

  While recognizing the importance of technology, systems development, and

  functional transaction processing systems, emphasis in the innovative

  uses of information technology are discussed.

  

SKILLS TO BE LEARNED

  K    Communications - Each student is expected to play an active role in

     classroom discussions.  Attendance, use of eMail, WebCT and homework 
will 

     be important parts of this course. .

K    Critical Thinking - Students will develop critical thinking skills by

problem solving and solution implementation.

  K    Information Technology - Expanding the overall understanding of

     Information Systems is the primary focus of this course.  Business 
examples 

     are used through the semester. .

  

COURSE OUTCOMES

  After completion of this course the student will be able to:

     1.   Demonstrate an understanding of Information Systems principles

2.   Demonstrate an understanding of the changing role of an IS

professional

3.   Understand the business usage of databases along with utilizing an

Access database and creating queries and reports.

4.   Understand the business usage of decision support systems along with

utilizing an Excel decision support systems and creating various scenarios.

5.   Demonstrate proficient use of the Windows XP Operating System.



COURSE INSTRUCTOR

                         Barbara D. Turner

                         Office:   College Center - Business Studies Area -

                    Office 159

                           Phone:    856.415.2297

                           eMail:    BTurnergccnj.edu

  

  Office Hours posted on office door - other times available upon request.

 If you have a learning disability and need special accommodations, please

                          inform the instructor.

  

POLICIES OF THE COURSE:



     Attendance

     Students are expected to attend and participate in class. The class

     participation grade is predicated upon active contribution in the

     class and labs.  Exams and quizzes missed may not be made up, except

     in cases of prolonged illness or other conditions approved by the

     instructor PRIOR to the class missed.  Students absent from class are

     responsible for material missed.  If you have a learning disability

     and need special accommodations, please inform  the instructor.



     Grading

     Credit for each component of the course follows:

         Assignments                                        20

         Three Exams (10 points each)                       30

         Four Projects (10 points each)                     40

         Participation                                      10

         TOTAL                                                 100



     Final grades will be assigned based upon your total points earned and

     the letter grades will be determined from the following table.



                   B    87-        C    77-        D    67-

 A     94-        89.9             79.9             69.9

 100              B     83-        C     73-        D     63-

 A-    90-        86.9             76.9             66.9

 93.9             B-    80-        C-    70-        D-    60-

                   82.9             72.9             62.9

                                                       F    

                                                       BELOW 60

     

     Tests  Assignments



          Assignments:

          Assignments are listed under the ASSIGNMENTS icon in WebCT.

          Assignments are also submitted via WebCT.



          Examinations:

          The exams will require you to think critically to complete. The

          exams consist of two parts:  a multiple-choice section and an

          essay section.



          Make-up Exams:

          There are no make-up tests available for this course. There are

          no exceptions to this policy. All tests are timed.  It is

          essential that you plan your personal schedule to ensure that you

          can take the tests.  Test dates are published under the COURSE

          SCHEDULE icon on the class home page in WebCT.

          

          

     Withdrawal

          Students should familiarize themselves with the colleges

          withdrawal dates, policy and procedures that are explained in the

          catalog.  Please advise the instructor if you wish to withdraw

          before the withdrawal deadline as specified in the college

          calendar.  Student and instructor must fill out appropriate

          paperwork.  If the paperwork is not filled out, a grade of W

          will not be assigned.  Your grade will be determined by the

          amount of points accumulated at the time of the last class you

          attended.  College policy dictates that a student cannot withdraw

          from a class after the add/drop date.  See publication posted on

          the bulletin board outside of my office for details.

     

     Class Participation

          Class participation is expected and encouraged.  Participation is

          defined as reading and preparing for class, participating in

          discussions, completing and submitting assignments on time, and

          taking part in all activities.

     

     Classroom Courtesy

          Students are expected to exhibit a professional manner.  Commonly

          recognized courtesy is expected.  CELL PHONES and Beepers should

          not be heard or used during class.

     

     Academic Honesty

          All assignments and test answers must originate from the

          individual student.  Noncompliance will result in a grade of F

          being assigned.  Please consult your student handbook and the

          college catalog for further information concerning academic

          honesty.

     

     Students with Disabilities:

          If you wish to receive special accommodations as a student with a

          documented disability, please make an appointment with the

          Learning Specialist on this campus.  If you will need assistance

          during an emergency classroom evacuation, it is imperative that

          you speak with your campus Learning Specialist immediately.

          Please provide documentation during the first class meeting if

          you require special assistance due to a disability.  All

          reasonable efforts are made to accommodate all students.

     
