7



                   GLOUCESTER COUNTY COLLEGE

               Business and Technology Division



                        COURSE SYLLABUS





                                             Fall      2002

                                             SEMESTER/YEAR





CIS 109                            Operations Systems

COURSE CODE                        COURSE TITLE





                        2                                    2

3

LECTURE/RECITATION HOURS           CREDITS





Introduction to Operating Systems:      Gorman, Mary,  Stubbs,

S. Todd

Advanced Course                    and CEP Inc.

TITLE OF TEXT                      AUTHOR(S)





                                   Course Technology

                                   PUBLISHER





15   Weeks

LENGTH OF SEMESTER                 INSTRUCTOR





CATALOG DESCRIPTION:



This  course  presents  the theory, basic  operation  and  the

practical utilization of widely implemented operating  systems

such as Windows, Unix using Linux, Novell Netware and MAC OSX.

Principal  topics include file system organization,  creating,

deleting and managing files and directories, output, input and

storage  devices,  modems  and other  communications  devices,

command  structure and command language programming.  Students

will also study network connecting, resource sharing over  two

networks and standard operating and maintenance procedures.











109

PURPOSE OF THE COURSE:



To provide an in-depth study of the most commonly used network

operating    systems    from    an   administrative/management

standpoint.



OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE:



1.     Study  and  understand  networking  concepts  such   as

   configuring the operating system on the network, and properly

   installing an operating system on a network workstation.



2.   Study how to manage users and groups on a network.



3.   Study how to secure a network.



SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:



After completing this course, the student will be able to:



1.   Describe what a network is and why networks are important

     in business today.



2.   Explain the difference between a peer-to-peer network and

     a client/server network.



3. Understand  the  basics of installation  and  operation  of

   commonly used network operating systems.



4. Understand  the  main  features  of  the  current   Windows

   operating system.



5. Understand  disk  management  operations  in  an  operating

   system.



6. Understand  and  manage  users  and  user  groups   in   an

   operating system.



7. Understand   basic   troubleshooting   procedures   in   an

   operating system.



8. Understand  the  basic security features  in  an  operating

   system.



POLICIES OF THE COURSE:



 1.GCC Attendance Policy:



   There  is  significant  value  in  the  daily,  cumulative,

   educational  growth that results from regular participation

   in  class.   This is especially true where ideas, concepts,

   points  of  view,  social development,  poise,  confidence,

   knowledge  and  success  derive  from  the  interaction  of

   students and faculty.



   Therefore,  students  are  expected  to  attend  all  class

   sessions  for  which they are scheduled.   Students  attain

   maximum  academic benefit through regular class attendance.

   The   effect  of  absences  on  student  grades   will   be

   determined by each instructor  consistent with his  or  her

   stated policy provided in course outlines.

 2.Instructors Attendance Policy:



   Daily  attendance  is  required of  all  students.   Exams,

   quizzes  and  labs  missed may not be made  up,  except  in

   cases of prolonged illness or other conditions approved  by

   the   instructor  prior  to  the  class(es)  being  missed.

   Students  absent from class are responsible  for  obtaining

   materials missed.



   WARNING:   The  information discussed in  the  lectures  is

   cumulative  in  nature  therefore,  excessive  absenteeism

   leads  to  a point where it will be impossible for  you  to

   successfully  complete  this  course  with  a  transferable

   grade.



   A  penalty  will be assessed to the students final  letter

   grade for excessive absences as follows:

                 of Absences       Penalty



                         4          1 grade level

                                         5           2   grade

   levels

                                         6           3   grade

   levels

                                         7           4   grade

   levels

                                                             8

   5 grade levels

                                         9           6   grade

   levels

                              10 or more       grade of F



METHOD OF EVALUATION:



Grades will be computed as follows:



                20      Exam I

                20      Exam II

                20      Exam III

                20      Project I

                20      Project II



MISSED WORK:



   All  work  must  be  submitted at the  announced  deadline,

   which unless stated otherwise, will be at the beginning  of

   class on the announced date.



   As  a  general  rule,  work  submitted  late  will  not  be

   accepted.   Tests  or  assignments  may  not  be   made-up.

   However,   if   you  think  you  have  a   sufficient   and

   documentable  reason to warrant an exception to  the  rule,

   see  the  instructor  immediately  after  the  absence   to

   discuss the situation.





SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR AUDIT:



   If  a  student wishes to attend a class regularly but  does

   not  wish  to  receive a grade or credit, the  student  may

   choose  to  audit  the  course.  For  this  to  occur,  the

   student  must  first  register  for  the  course,  pay  the

   tuition and any fees, and then switch to audit status.



   Audits  are not accepted unless an Audit Form is  completed

   by   the  student  and  course  instructor  and  officially

   approved  by  the  Director  of Student  Development.   All

   audit  enrollments must occur during the first  half  of  a

   semester  or its equivalent.  Once the auditor is enrolled,

   the  course  cannot be changed to credit.   The  instructor

   will  determine the conditions of the audit  to  which  the

   student  must  adhere  in order to receive  an  R  grade,

   signifying  successful completion of  the  audit.   If  the

   student  fails  to  meet  the conditions,  a  W  will  be

   assigned, signifying audit withdrawal.



 INCOMPLETE GRADE:



   A  grade  of incomplete (I) may be reported for  a  student

   who  has  carried a course with a passing grade  until  the

   end  of  the semester, but due to illness or other  unusual

   and  substantiated cause has been unable  to  complete  the

   final examination or some limited amount of assigned work.



   The  student and faculty member must complete the  Student

   Contract  for  Incomplete form prior to  a  grade  of  I

   being  given.   Any incomplete not removed by  the  end  of

   this period automatically becomes an F.



WITHDRAWALS:



   A student wishing to withdraw from a course or the

   College, should formally complete all withdrawal

   procedures at the Student Development Office prior to the

   announced end of the withdrawal period (the end of the

   10th week of a regular semester or two-thirds through

   shorter semesters.).



   A student who officially withdraws from a course will

   receive a W grade which will not affect the students

   GPA.  Withdrawal is not permitted after the withdrawal

   period.



OFFICE HOURS:



   Your  instructors  office hours  will  be  posted  by  his

   office  door in the College Center.  You are encouraged  to

   take advantage of this time.

   Your instructors e-mail address is

   and the office phone is 415-



INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS:



   Introduction to Operating Systems:  Advanced  Course,  by

   Gorman, Mary, Stubbs, S. Todd and CEP Inc.





ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:



   Honesty  and  the  scholarly pursuit  of  truth  are  basic

   precepts of academic integrity and are fundamental to  this

   course  and College.  As a member of the College community,

   you  have the responsibility to maintain academic integrity

   and  to  conduct yourself in a manner consistent  with  the

   Colleges policy on Student Conduct, which is found in  the

   Student  Handbook.   Accordingly, you are  expected  to  do

   your  own  work and not to give or receive assistance  with

   your work unless directed to do so by the instructor.    To

   do otherwise would constitute academic dishonesty.



   Academic  dishonesty is a serious offense and will  not  be

   tolerated.   It  may include, but is not  limited  to,  the

   following violations.



                Cheating  -  (i.e.,  the use  of  unauthorized

       materials,   information,  or  aid  in   the   learning

       process.)



                Collaboration  -  (i.e., unauthorized  working

       with others to complete work)

                Fabrication - (i.e., submitting an  untruthful

       statement or the resubmitting of returned academic work

       without prior permission)



                Plagiarism  - (i.e., submitting  the  work  of

       others  as  ones  original work  or  failure  to  cite

       sources of information used)



               Tampering With Testing or Grades

   

   College  sanctions  for  violations  are  outlined  in  the

   Student  Handbook.   Penalties in the course  for  academic

   dishonesty  may range from a reprimand to failure  for  the

   course.



   It  is  your  responsibility  to  bring  knowledge  of  any

   violations  of academic integrity to the attention  of  the

   instructor.

                OUTLINE OF LEARNING ACTIVITIES

                               

                                                      Text

Week                                               Chapters



   1    Introduction to Network                          1

        Operating Systems

            -    What is a Network

            -    Understanding Network Configurations

            -    Network Media and Hardware

            -    Future of Networking



2-3     Mac OS X                                         2

        Introduction to Mac OS X

        Installing Mac OS X

        Customizing the Look

        Managing Mac OS X through System

        Preferences

        Setting up the Mac for Multiple Users

        Setting Up the Network

        Beyond Aqua



4-5     Microsoft Windows XP                             3

        Introduction

        Installation of Windows XP

        The Boot Process

        Configuring Windows XP

        Disk Management

        Setting Up and Managing Users

        Troubleshooting the Operating System



 6      EXAM I



7-8     Windows 2000 Professional                        4

        Introduction

        Differences between Windows 2000 and Previous Versions

        Installation of Windows 2000

        Management Tools

        Using the Control Panel

        Disk Management

        Setting Up and Managing User Accounts

        Assigning NTFS Permissions

        Working with Shared Folders

        Auditing



9-10    Windows NT Workstation                           5

        Features of Windows NT Workstation

        Installing Windows NT Workstation

        Configuring Windows NT Workstation

        Disk Management

        Managing Users and Groups

        Windows NT Security



11      EXAM II - Project I is due.



12      Novell Netware                                   6

        The Beginnings of Novell

        Installation of NetWare

        Novells Network Objects

        Disk Management

        Creating Users and Groups

        The NetWare Security Model



13-14   UNIX (using the Linux variation)

        Introduction

        Installing Linux

        Managing Disks

        Managing Users

        Troubleshooting the Operating System



15      EXAM III - Project II is due.
