            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                   GLOUCESTER COUNTY COLLEGE



                         Math Division





                                                   Summer II 2000



                                                  SEMESTER/YEAR







MAT 102                                      Concepts of Math II

COURSE CODE                             COURSE TITLE







                                              3

                                        CREDITS







Mathematical             Ideas,              8th              Ed.

Miller/Heeren/Hornsby

TITLE OF TEXT                           AUTHOR







                                        Addison Wesley

                                        PUBLISHER







3   Weeks                                                 William

Mays

LENGTH OF SEMESTER                      ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR



                                        C-154   (856) 415-2160

                                        OFFICE    PHONE



COURSE DESCRIPTION:                     wmaysgccnj.edu

                                        EMAIL



This  course  completes  a two semester sequence  of  mathematics

concepts.   Topics  covered  are  algebra,  geometry,  coordinate

geometry,  mathematical  systems, number  theory,  matrices,  and

consumer mathematics.



PREREQUISITE:  MAT 101





M102-wm

MAT-CO

OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE:



 A.  General Objectives



     Upon  completion of Concepts of Math II, the student  should

     have a broader background of mathematical concepts and their

     application.   Students should also have  some  appreciation

     for   the   history  of  and  development  of   methods   of

     computation.



 B.  Specific Objectives



     Upon  completion of the course, the student should  be  able

     to:



      1.   Recognize various numeration systems, sets of numbers,

and sequences.

          2.    Perform  basic  operations  with  whole  numbers,

        integers, rational and irrational numbers.

         3.   Use scientific notation and laws of exponents.

         4.   Compute simple and compound interest and APR.

           5.     Recognize  factors  to  consider  when   making

        purchases on installment, buying a car or a house.

         6.   Solve simple equations and inequalities.

         7.   Solve quadratic equations using formula.

         8.   Recognize geometric relationships.

         9.   Use geometric formulas.

        10.   Perform basic operations using matrices.



FORMAT OF THE COURSE:



 A.  Attendance:



        1.To  obtain  the  maximum benefits from the  educational

        opportunities  available  at Gloucester  County  College,

        students   must   establish  habits  of   regular   class

        attendance.   Nothing  else has yet  been  discovered  to

        replace  in  value  the  daily,  cumulative,  educational

        growth  that  results from regular attendance  in  class.

        This is especially true where ideas, concepts, points  of

        view,  social development, poise, confidence,  knowledge,

        and  success derive from the interaction of students  and

        faculty.   Taking  a test or turning in a  report,  while

        extremely  important  as part of  the  total  educational

        process  will  not, in itself, provide for  the  complete

        student  growth  attainment  to  which  the  College   is

        committed.



           Therefore,  it  is  the policy  of  Gloucester  County

        College that attendance in every class is believed to  be

        of  prime  importance and will weigh heavily in attaining

        academic  potential.  Although absences may not  be  used

        as  a  basis  for  grade determination,  students  should

        understand  that  work or tests missed  as  a  result  of

        absences   or   inadequately  made-up   assignments   may

        jeopardize   their  grades.   Students  must  understand,

        therefore, that although attendance alone is  not  to  be

        the   basis  for  academic  evaluation,  attendance   and

        achievement are recognized as being interrelated.















        2.Students are advised that attendance at each  class  is

        expected.   Absence  is not normally considered  a  valid

        excuse  for  not  being  prepared  for  the  next  class.

        Attendance  is  required (unless other arrangements  have

        been  made) on days of announced tests.  If an unexpected

        emergency arises, the instructor must be notified on  the

        day  of the missed test.  A message can be passed  on  to

        your instructor by calling (856) 415-2160.



 B.  Method of Evaluation:



     Evaluation will include 3 tests.



C.   Determination of Course Grade



     Course  grade  will  be  computed based  on  an  average  of

     evaluative  tools  listed  above, and  using  the  following

     scale.



               90 -  100    A             70 - 76.9    C

               89 - 89.9    A-            69 - 69.9    C-

               87 - 88.9    B            67 - 68.9    D

               80 - 86.9    B             60 - 66.9    D

               79 - 79.9    B-            59 - 59.9    D-

               77 - 78.9    C            Below 59      F



 D.     Make-Up Tests



     Except  under  unusual circumstances, no  make-up  tests  or

     quizzes will be given in MAT 102.



E.   Specific Conditions for Audit:



     If  you wish to attend a class regularly, but do not wish to

     receive  grades or credit, you may register as  an  auditor,

     paying  the  appropriate tuition and fees.  Audits  are  not

     accepted  unless an audit form is completed by  the  student

     and   course  instructor  and  officially  approved  by  the

     Director of Student Development.  All audit enrollments must

     occur during the first half of a semester or its equivalent.

     Once  the auditor is enrolled, the course cannot be  changed

     to  credit.  The instructor will determine the conditions of

     the  audit  to  which the student must adhere  in  order  to

     receive  an  R grade, signifying successful completion  of

     the  audit.  If the student fails to meet the conditions,  a

     W will be assigned, signifying audit withdrawal.



 F.     Incomplete Grade:



     A  grade of incomplete (I) may be reported for a student who

     has carried  a course with a passing grade until the end  of

     the  semester,  but  due to illness  or  other  unusual  and

     substantiated  cause has been unable to complete  the  final

     examination or some limited amount of assigned work.



     The  student  and faculty member must complete the  Student

     Contract for Incomplete form prior to a grade of I  being

     given.  Any incomplete not removed by the end of this period

     automatically becomes an F.



 G.     Withdrawals:



     A  student wishing to withdraw from a course or the College,

     should  formally complete all withdrawal procedures  at  the

     Student Development Office.  Failure to attend class  or  to

     give  notice  will prevent the awarding of  a  W.   A  W

     indicates  that the student has initiated the  above  policy

     from  the 11th day to the tenth week of the semester or two-

     thirds through shorter courses.



     During the last five weeks of the semester or its equivalent

     in  a  summer session any student withdrawing from a  course

     must  receive  a letter grade for the course.  Students  who

     are not present during the last five weeks of a semester for

     health  or other extenuating circumstances may, after making

     prior arrangements with the instructor, receive an I grade

     and be permitted to make up work.



H.   Instructional Materials:



     Required Text:  Mathematical Ideas, Eighth Ed.  by   Charles

     D. Miller, Vern E. Heeren, E. John Hornsby, Jr..



     Also:  Various handouts provided by instructor.



 J.     Other:



                    1.    Tutoring         Students  experiencing

                    difficulty are encouraged to make use of  the

                    available tutoring services.



                    2.   Calculators           A calculator  with

                    exponential functions is required for some of

                    the topics covered.  It is highly recommended

                    that  you  have  one to use  for  the  entire

                    course.



                    3.  Homework        The student should expect

                    to spend 2 hours working outside of class for

                    every   hour   spent  in   class.    Specific

                    assignments will be given in class.  Students

                    are  responsible for being prepared for class

                    even   if  they  miss  the  class  when   the

                    assignment is given.



                 OUTLINE OF LEARNING ACTIVITIES

                                                            Tests

Will Be

                                                    Given  on  or

About



                                                       July 10

                                                       July 17

                                                       July 20





Chapter 5   Number Theory



            5.1 Prime and Composite Numbers

            5.3 Greatest Common Factor and Least Common Multiple



Chapter 6   The Real Number System



            6.1 Introduction to Sets of Real Numbers

             6.2 Operations, Properties, and Applications of Real

Numbers

            6.3 Rational Numbers and Decimals

            6.4 Irrational Numbers and Decimals

            6.5 Applications of Decimals and Percents



Chapter 7   The Basic Concepts of Algebra



            7.1 Linear Equations

            7.2 Applications of Linear Equations

            7.3 Ratio, Proportion, and Variance

            7.4 Linear Inequalities

            7.5 Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation

            7.6 Polynomials and Factoring

            7.7 Quadratic Equations and Applications



Chapter  8    Functions,  Graphs,  and  Systems  of  Equations  

Inequalities



            8.1 The Rectangular Coordinate System and Circles

            8.2 Lines and Their Slopes

            8.3 Equations of Lines

             8.4  An Introduction to Functions:  Linear Functions

and Applications

            8.5 Quadratic Functions and Applications

            8.7 Systems of Equations and Applications

            8.8 Linear Inequalities and Systems of Inequalities



Chapter 9   Geometry



            9.1 Points, Lines, Planes, and Angles

            9.2 Curves, Polygons and Circles

            9.3 Perimeter, Area and Circumference

            9.4 The Geometry of Triangles

            9.5 Space Figures, Volume, and surface Area



Chapter 13  Consumer Mathematics



            13.1     Interest and Inflation

            13.2        Consumer Credit

            13.4         Buying a House



Chapter 14  Matrices and Their Applications



            14.1  Basic Operations on Matrices

            14.2   Multiplication of Matrices

            14.3Matrix Row Operations and Systems of Equations

            14.4        Matrix Inverses

            OUTLINE OF LEARNING ACTIVITIES



Chapter     5        Number   Theory       the    Real    Number

Tests Will Be

                                                           System

Given on or About



                5.1  Number Theory                           July

10

            5.2 The Integers                                 July

15

            5.3 The Rational Numbers                         July

21

             5.4        The  Irrational  Numbers  and  the   Real

July 24

               Number System

           5.5 Real Numbers and Their Properties

           5.6 Rules of Exponents and Scientific Notation

           5.7 Arithmetic and Geometric Sequences

           5.8 Fibonnacci Sequence





Chapter 6      Algebra, Graphs,  Functions



           6.1 Order of Operations

           6.2 Linear Equations in One Variable

           6.3 Formulas

           6.4 Applications of Linear Equations in One

               Variable

           6.5 Variation

           6.6 Linear Inequalities

           6.7 Graphing Linear Equations

           6.8 Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

           6.9 Solving Quadratic Equations Using Factoring

                              and the Quadratic Formula

           6.10     Functions and Their Graphs (optional)





Chapter 7      Systems of Linear Equations  Inequalities



           7.1 Systems of Linear Equations

           7.2 Solving Systems of Equations by the Substitution

                              and Addition Methods

           7.3 Matrices

           7.4 Solving Systems of Equations Using Matrices

           7.5 Systems of Linear Inequalities

           7.6 Linear Programming





Chapter 9      Geometry



           9.1 Points, Lines, Planes, and Angles

           9.2 Polygons

           9.3 Perimeter and Area

           9.4 Volume

           9.5      Graph Theory (optional)

Chapter 11 Consumer Mathematics



           11.1 Percent

           11.2 Promissory Notes and Simple Interest

           11.3 Compound Interest

           11.4 Installment Buying

           11.5 Buying a House with a Mortgage
