            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



                                                                   

                  Mercer County Community College

                                 

            Arts, Communication and Technology Division

                                 

                              CIS 250

                                 

                ACCESS 2000 CONCEPTS AND TECHNIQUES

                                 

                                 

                                 



COURSE DESCRIPTION:

This course is designed to cover current and advanced topics such

as VBA development, dynamic data-driven web sites, Internet

security, and office integration.  Students will learn the features

offered in new Access program, including web publishing,

subdatasheet views, improved SQL Server integration, and much more.







Text (s): Reference Division Booklist



Prerequisites:  CIS 147



Co-requisites:   None



Credits:  4         Lecture Hours: 2         Studio/Lab Hours:  2



Food and drink are strictly prohibited in classrooms as per health

 and safety laws.  Students may not bring in chemicals or cleaning

            fluids without the appropriate MSD sheets.











Course Coordinator: Winston H. Maddox             Latest Review:

8/2001





                                 

                                 



COURSE OBJECTIVES



This course is designed to cover hot and advanced topics such as

VBA development, dynamic data-driven web sites, Internet security,

and Office integration.  Students will learn the features offered

in new Access program, including web publishing, subdatasheet

views, improved SQL Server integration, and much more. Students

will create, manipulate, and customize databases using Access/VBA

environment.



TESTS



A minimum of six tests/mini projects will evaluate student

learning. Each test/mini project will contain sentence completion,

interpretation of a flowchart and/or program, and may require the

writing of a program or program element.



QUIZZES



Students should expect a brief quiz each week based upon the

previous lecture and reading assignment.



LABORATORY



Students will be given a minimum of six major projects to provide a

hands-on experiential component in the programming environment.

All assignments will have deadlines.



LABORATORY EVALUTION



Students performance of each laboratory assignment will be

evaluated and assigned a point value according to the following:





          Standards           0 to 2 points

                         Adherence to specified Programming

                         Standard. Programs must contain properly

                         identified modules. The minimum modules

                         for any program are: Program

                         Identification, Variable Map, Program

                         Description, Main Routine, and EOJ

                         Routine.

                         



     Remarks             0 to 2 point

                         Generous use of remarks within the Main

                         and Subroutines must be made.







Use of Project Lesson         0 to 2 points

                         The Visual Basic/Oracle/both elements

                         specified in the project lesson section

                         of the assignment must be used.

          

     Execution           0 to 4 points

                         Output must be according to the projects

                    specifications.

          

     Total each project       0 to 10 points







FINAL GRADE



     The final grade is a composite based upon:



          Tests (Theory/projects/both)       40

          Laboratory Major Projects(class)             30

          Midterm Examination                15

          Final Examination                               15









Course Outline





PART I  AN OVERVIEW OF ACCESS



    Getting Started and Getting Around

    Understanding Databases

    Access in an Evening

    About Access, Office, Windows, and the Internet



PART II  CREATING A DATABASE

        

    Creating a Database

    Creating Access Tables

    Linking, Importing, and Exporting Data

    Adding, Editing, and Viewing Data

    Sorting, Searching, Filtering, and Printing

    Querying Your Tables

    Creating Forms with Form Wizards

    Creating Reports with Report Wizards

    Creating Custom Forms and Reports

    Creating Data Access Pages

    Creating Charts and PivotTables



PART III  DATABASE AND TUNING AND ADMINISTRATION

        

    Personalizing Access

    Speeding Up Your Database

    Administering Your Database

    Networking and Security



PART IV  BUILDING A CUSTOM APPLICATION

        

    Creating a Custom Application

    Using Macros to Create Custom Actions

    Creating Custom Switchboards

    Creating Custom Dialog Boxes

    Creating Custom Toolbars

    Creating Custom Menus







PART V  REFINING A CUSTOM APPLICATION

        

    Introducing Visual Basic

    Creating Custom Error Messages

    Interacting with Other Programs

    Pulling It All Together

    Working with Projects



PART VI  MACRO PROGRAMMING



    Macro Basics

    Dealing with Errors in Macros

    Navigation with Macros

    Data Maintenance with Macros

    Working with Groups of Records Using Macros



Academic Integrity Statement:



A student who a.) knowingly represents work of others as his/her

own b.) uses or obtains unauthorized assistance in the execution

of any work or c.) gives fraudulent assistance to another student

is guilty of cheating. Violators will be penalized. (Student

Handbook)



Classroom Conduct Statement:



It is the students responsibility to attend all of their classes.

If they miss a class meeting for any reason, students are

responsible for all content that is covered, for announcements made

in their absence, and for acquiring any materials that may have

been distributed in class. It is expected that students be on time

for all their classes. If students walk into a class after it had

begun, it is expected that they choose a seat close to where they

entered the room so they do not disrupt the class meeting.



Students are expected to follow ordinary rules of courtesy during

class session. Engaging in private, side conversations during class

time is distracting to other students and to the instructor.

Leaving class early without having informed the instructor prior to

class is not appropriate. Unless there is an emergency, leaving

class and returning while class is in session is not acceptable

behavior. Disruptive behavior of any type, including sharpening

pencils during class while someone is speaking, is not appropriate.



The college welcomes all students into an environment that creates

a sense of community and pride and respect we are all here to work

cooperatively and to learn together.

     

                                 
