            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Mercer County Community College



                       COURSE OUTLINE





CIS 182                      PC Applications:

Presentations

Course Number                           Course Title





Business                           15 Weeks

Division                           Length of Semester





3                            2/2

 Credits                           Lecture/Laboratory





Text:     Title:         PowerPoint 2000:  A Professional

Approach

     Author:   Fisher-Larson, Marple

     Publisher:     Glencoe/McGraw-Hill

     Edition:  2000





Catalog Description:



Presentation graphics software is used to create and

customize presentations working with objects, lines, fills

and colors.  Students will work with text manipulation,

drawing techniques, animation and slide show effects and

will create tables, flowcharts and organization charts.



Prerequisite:  None

Corequisite:  None



                              Judy Ehresman

                              Course Coordinator





Instructor Name 

Time/Location 

Office /Phone  

Office Hours 

E-mail 





Rev. Fall 2000

buscodisk4

CIS 182PC Applications:  Presentations

Page 2



Objectives/Course Schedule



Week 1



Introduction to course

Discussion of MOUS certification (See Appendix F)

Review of textbook appendices



UNIT 1  BASIC SKILLS



Lesson 1  What Is PowerPoint



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Start PowerPoint.

     2.   Navigate in PowerPoint.

     3.   Key text on a slide.

     4.   Use PowerPoint views.

     5.   Run a presentation as a slide show.

     6.   Name and save a presentation.

     7.   Print slides and handouts.

     8.   Close a presentation and exit PowerPoint.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



Lesson 2  Basic Presentation Tools



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Use the AutoContent Wizard.

     2.   Change sample text.

     3.   Use the spelling checker and style checker.

     4.   Use the Find and Replace features.

     5.   Rearrange slides use Cut, Copy, and Paste and delete

          slides.

     6.   Add headers and footers.

     7.   Choose printing options.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



UNIT 1 APPLICATIONS  ASSIGNMENTSAS INSTRUCTED



CIS 182PC Applications:  Presentations

Page 3



Week 3



     PROJECT 1

     UNIT 1 EXAM



UNIT 2  DEVELOPING A PRESENTATION



Lesson 3  Creating a Presentation from Scratch



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Create a new presentation.

     2.   Add new slides.

     3.   Promote and demote text.

     4.   Use and Undo and Redo commands.

     5.   Change slide layouts.

     6.   Change design templates and color schemes.

     7.   Work with speakers notes.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



Week 4



Lesson 4  Using the Outline Pane



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Create a presentation using the outline pane.

     2.   Add a new slide in the outline pane.

     3.   Promote and demote outline entries.

     4.   Move bulleted items in the outline pane.

     5.   Move slides in the outline pane.

     6.   Create a summary slide.

     7.   Insert slides and import and export outlines.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



CIS 182PC Applications:  Presentations

Page 4



Week 5



Lesson 5  Working with Text



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Apply fonts and text attributes to text.

     2.   Apply text attributes to a placeholder.

     3.   Control presentation fonts.

     4.   Work with bullets.

     5.   Change text alignment.

     6.   Change the size and position of a text placeholders.

     7.   Use master slides to format text.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



UNIT 2 APPLICATIONS ASSIGNMENTS AS INSTRUCTED



Week 6



     PROJECT 2

     UNIT 2 EXAM



UNIT 3  CUSTOMIZING A PRESENTATION



Lesson 6  Working with PowerPoint Objects



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Use clip art.

     2.   Use WordArt for special effects.

     3.   Add floating text boxes.

     4.   Rotate text.

     5.   Work with basic drawing tools.

     6.   Use basic AutoShapes.

     7.   Place text in an AutoShape.

     8.   Work with scanned images.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



CIS 182PC Applications:  Presentations

Page 5



Week 7



Lesson 7  Working with Lines, Fills, and Colors



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Change the line color and style of objects.

     2.   Change the fill color of objects.

     3.   Work with fill patterns, shading, and textures.

     4.   Use the Format Painter tool to copy formatting.

     5.   Apply design elements to master slides and backgrounds

          to create a custom template.

     6.   Change the colors of clip art.

     7.   Change a presentation color scheme.

     8.   Change black and white settings for better printing.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



Week 8



Lesson 8  Manipulating PowerPoint Objects



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Select multiple objects.

     2.   Align, flip, and distribute objects.

     3.   Group and ungroup objects.

     4.   Work with layers of objects.

     5.   Apply object shadows and 3-D effects.

     6.   Use the Duplicate command.

     7.   Work with advanced clip art editing.

     8.   Customize and create toolbars.



UNIT 3 APPLICATIONS ASSIGNMENTS AS INSTRUCTED



Week 9



     PROJECT 3

     UNIT 3 EXAM/MIDTERM EXAM



CIS 182PC Applications:  Presentations

Page 6



UNIT 4  ADVANCED TECHNIQUES



Lesson 9  Advanced Text Manipulation



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Control paragraph indents by using the ruler.

     2.   Set tab stops and create a tabbed table.

     3.   Change line spacing and paragraph spacing.

     4.   Change text box margins and word wrap options.

     5.   Work with page setup options.

     6.   Customize handout masters and note masters.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



Week 10



Lesson 10  Advanced Drawing Techniques



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Use guides to position and measure objects.

     2.   Use zoom for precise object placement.

     3.   Explore the Snap and Nudge features.

     4.   Draw using the Freeform tool.

     5.   Edit points on a freeform drawing.

     6.   Draw using the Curve tool.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



Week 11



Lesson 11  Animation and Slide Show Effects



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Add slide transitions.

     2.   Use text animations.

     3.   Create object animations.

     4.   Add sound and motion clips.

     5.   Add animation effects to a template design.

     6.   Add hyperlinks and action buttons.

     7.   Set automatic slide timings.

CIS 182PC Applications:  Presentations

Page 7



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



UNIT 4 APPLICATIONS ASSIGNMENTS AS INSTRUCTED



Week 12



     PROJECT 4

     UNIT 4 EXAM



UNIT 5  CHARTS AND TABLES



Lesson 12  Creating a Chart



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Insert a column chart.

     2.   Change sample data.

     3.   View a new chart.

     4.   Edit a chart.

     5.   Format a chart.

     6.   Add shapes and text objects to a chart.

     7.   Insert other types of charts.

     8.   Animate chart elements.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



Week 13



Lesson 13  Creating a Table



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Create a table.

     2.   Key text in a table.

     3.   Select a table, table cells, and table text.

     4.   Format a table.

     5.   Align text and numbers in a table.

     6.   Change the height and width of rows, columns, and

          tables.

     7.   Insert and delete rows, columns, and individual cells.

     8.   Insert a Microsoft Word table.

CIS 182PC Applications:  Presentations

Page 8



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



Week 14



Lesson 14  Flowcharts and Organization Charts



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Draw flowchart AutoShapes.

     2.   Connect objects by using connector lines.

     3.   Create an organization chart.

     4.   Add boxes to organization charts.

     5.   Rearrange organization chart boxes.

     6.   Format organization chart elements.



Complete the following:  Concepts Review, Critical Thinking,

Skills Review, Lesson Applications



UNIT 5 APPLICATIONS ASSIGNMENTS AS INSTRUCTED



Week 15



     PROJECT 5

     UNIT 5 EXAM



UNIT 6  DELIVERING PRESENTATIONS



Lesson 15  Distributing and Presenting Your Work



After completing this lesson, you will be able to:



     1.   Use Meeting Minder to record notes during a

          presentation.

     2.   Distribute presentations in a variety of formats.

     3.   Use PowerPoints Pack and Go feature.

     4.   Prepare a presentation for viewing on the Web.



UNIT 6 APPLICATIONS ASSIGNMENTS AS INSTRUCTED



     PROJECT 6

     FINAL EXAM

CIS 182PC Applications:  Presentations

Page 9



EVALUATION/FINAL GRADE:



     FIVE UNIT EXAMS               60 of grade

     SIX LABORATORY PROJECTS       20 of grade

     FINAL EXAM                    20 of grade



Academic Integrity Statement:



A student who a.) knowingly represents work of other as

his/her own b.) uses or obtains unauthorized assistance in

the execution of any academic work or c.) gives fraudulent

assistance to another student is guilty of cheating.

Violators will be penalized.  (Student Handbook)



Classroom Conduct Statement:



It is the students responsibility to attend all of their

classes.  If they miss a class meeting for any reason,

students are responsible for all content that is covered,

for announcements made in their absence, and for acquiring

any materials that may have been distributed in class.  It

is expected that students be on time for all their classes.

If students walk into a class after it has begun, it is

expected that they choose a seat close to where they entered

the room so that they do not disrupt the class meeting.



Students are expected to follow ordinary rules of courtesy

during class sessions.  Engaging in private, side

conversations during class time is distracting to other

students and to the instructor.  Leaving class early without

having informed the instructor prior to class is not

appropriate.  Unless there is an emergency, leaving class

and returning while class is in session is not acceptable

behavior.  Disruptive behavior of any type, including

sharpening pencils during class while someone is speaking,

is not appropriate.



The college welcomes all students into an environment that

creates a sense of community of pride and respect we are

all here to work cooperatively and to learn together.
