            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                  Mercer County Community College

                                 

            Arts, Communication and Technology Division

                                 

                              CIS255

                                 

             INTRODUCTION TO HTML AND WEBSITE HOSTING

                                 



COURSE DESCRIPTION:

An introduction to the two or three most popular operating systems

for website hosting.  Prac-tice installing, configuring, and

optimizing these operating systems as web servers.  The Hyper-text

Markup Language (HTML) will be thoroughly investigated including

the use of text and gra-phics based navigation, tables, cascading

style sheets, audio and graphics, frames and forms.  The future

direction of HTML, including XML and XHTML the role of scripting

languages, like VBScript, JavaScript, and Perl and HTML editors

will be introduced and summarized as a re-sult of student research.

Laboratory exercises will emphasize website and web page design and

development using various HTML features to publish brief student

papers on various Internet topics.



Text (s): Reference Division Booklist



Prerequisites:  MAT030, ENG030, and ENG035 or equivalent

proficiency and a basic understanding of the Internet:  CIS135,

CIS134 or equivalent proficiency



Co-requisites:  none



Credits:  4         Lecture Hours: 3    Studio/Lab Hours:  2









Food and drink are strictly prohibited in classrooms as per health

 and safety laws.  Students may not bring in chemicals or cleaning

            fluids without the appropriate MSD sheets.



Coordinator:   Winston H. Maddox                  Latest Review:

8/2001















OBJECTIVES



To develop the skills necessary to install operating systems on

workstations and servers, to install essential software, to

download and configure software for the Internet, and to prepare a

workstation or a server to host a website.



To learn and practice the use of HTML, including its various text

features, navigation between pages and URLs, tables, cascading

style sheets, using audio, video, and graphics files, frames, and

forms.



To develop confidence by publishing ones website, firstly on a

local, in-class, server and secondly on a remote, free, web

hosting site.



To prepare students for more advanced studies in both the artistic

and technical components of website development and management.



TESTS



There will be four tests, worth 6 points each, one after each part.

Tests will be completed in the testing center, to preserve class

and laboratory time.  Each test will be open for a 9 day period.







QUIZZES



No quizzes are planned.  Surprise or pop quizzes may be added to

determine if students have done the reading required for each weeks

lectures and laboratories.



LABORATORY



There will be 13 laboratory assignments, worth 3 points each, as

follows:



1.Using UNIX to perform directory and communications services



2.Loading a non-UNIX Operating System, Application Programs, and

  using the OS to perform directory, file, and communications

  services.



3.Develop a home page with a link to a resume page that

  describes the student.



4.Replace the simple bibliographic page that was developed in lab

  3 with a bibliographic page that uses ordered and unordered

  lists, and tags.



5.Add a new link to your home page to show images of yourself or

  of things that you want associated with you.  The images may be

  downloaded, scanned, recorded with a digital camera, or drawn

  with a suitable drawing tool.



6.Add music or audio to one or more of you image pages so that

  the user can either play music by clicking on an icon or that

  plays as background while the image is being viewed.  The music

  or audio that is presented may be either down loaded, recorded,

  or obtained from a public domain source.



7.Add a form to your website, with an appropriate link to your

  home page to collect information about those who visit your

  site.  Students will require a personal eMail account to

  complete this lab.



8.Modify your home page so that it uses frames, at least one

  source frame, and at least one target frame to display

  information from some other pages.



9.Replace one or more of your resume forms with forms that employs

  both tables and lists to store and display information.

  Students should be prepare to explain why some information is

  displayed using one technique and why other information used an

  alternative.



10.    Add a page to your site, or a feature to an existing page

  that displays a short video sequence.  An appropriate file must

  be found and downloaded from the Internet.



11.    Download and install Apache Web Server on a Windows

  computer and a UNIX computer.



12.    Installing Personal Web Server or Internet Information

  Server on a computer running  Windows-98 or Windows-2000.







13.    Publishing (loading) the students website on a local (in-

  lab) and public (on-the-internet) Web Server.



LABORATORY EVALUATION



Of the three (3) points that are assigned to each laboratory, the

students performance will be evaluated as follows:



  0.5 points:    Preparation, was the student ready for the lab

  0.5 points:    Punctuality, was the lab completed on-time

  1.0 points:    Appropriateness, does the work use the

            appropriate material and techniques

  1.0 points:    Code Quality, is the report or HTML well

            written, easy to follow, and appropriately documented



PROJECTS or PAPERS



Each student is required to use the Internet to search for Service

Providers that offer free WebSite hosting.  The student should

develop a criteria for comparing these free web hosting services

and then evaluate a minimum of 10 providers on each criteria.  The

students will share their evaluations during the 6th or 7th week of

the course and each student will be assigned two services for

further evaluation.  Each student will write a report, comparing

and contrasting the ten (or more) sites and discussing their

specific experience with two sites (5 points).  The final report

will be due the 13th week of class.



Each student is expected to develop and publish a website

describing him or herself or a topic of interest to the student (15

points).  The site must consist of at least four pages and the

homepage must use forms.  One page must use tables and one must use

lists, both may be on the same page.  The site must include links

to other Websites on the Internet.  The site must display images

and provide audio and either video or animation output.  Each

student will present their site in class during the last two weeks

of the semester other students will provide peer reviews (score

for various aspects plus a very brief written comment) of each

presentation.



Each student is required to write a two to five page paper, with

references to books, papers, and WebSites comparing and contrasting

UNIX and NT based Web Servers (5 points).  These papers will be

published as HTML pages and linked to the courses WebSite by the

instructor.  The printed report and HTML pages will be due the last

week of class.



FINAL GRADE



The final grade is based on the following:



  Tests  Quizzes:                24 points

  Laboratories:                   39 points

  Projects  Reports:        25 points

  Attendance  Participation:     12 points

            Total          100 points

  





Course grade is based on the total number of points earned as

follows:



  A         90 or more points

  B         80 or more points and less than 90 points

  C         70 or more points and less than 80 points

  D         60 or more points and less than 70 points

  F         less than 60 points



COURSE OUTLINE



I.   Part 1:   Operating Systems

     A.   UNIX

          1.   Booting and start-up

          2.   Basic Commands

          3.   Files  Directories

          4.   Security  File Management

     B.   Windows

          1.   Booting and start-up

          2.   Basic Commands

          3.   Files  Directories

          4.   Security  File Management

     Part 1 will require about three weeks and the completion of

     two laboratory assignments.  The 1st examination will follow

     the completion of this material.

     

II.  Part 2:        Basic HTML

     A.   Text formatting with HTML

     B.   Links to other pages

     C.   Numbered and unnumbered lists

     D.   Text and background color

     E.   Adding images or graphics to Web pages

     F.   Adding sound or music to Web pages

     G.   Adding video and animation to Web pages

     

     Part 2 will require about four weeks and the completion of

     four laboratory assignments.   The 1st part of the Internet

     Web Hosting service report is due at he end of this material.

     The 2nd examination will follow the completion of the Basic

     HTML material.

     

III. Part 3:        Advanced HTML

     A.   Forms

     B.   Frames

     C.   Tables

     D.   An introduction to Style Sheets

     E.   An overview of XHTML and XML

     

     Part 3 will require about four weeks and the completion of

     four laboratory assignments.  The Internet Web Hosting service

     report and each students WebSite project are due at the end of

     this material.  The 3rd examination will follow the completion

     of the Advanced HTML material.





IV.  Part 4:        Server Side Programming and Publishing and

Maintaining Web

               Sites

     A.   Active Server Pages (ASP) and the Common Gateway

     Interface

     B.   An introduction to scripting languages

     C.   Downloading, installing, and using the Apache Web Server

     D.   Installing IIS and / or PWS

     E.   Installing web sites on a third party server

     

     Part 4 will require four weeks with time for student

     presentations and peer reviews and the completion of three

     laboratory assignments.  Each student will present his web

     site and discuss his experience of installing the web site on

     the Internet during the last two weeks of class.  Each

     students comparison of UNIX and NT Servers is due at the end

     of this material.  The 4th examination will follow the

     completion of this material.

     

LABORATORY REQUIREMENTS



The laboratory used in this course must include a high-end personal

computer for each student and the instructor, with a projector for

the instructors machine that can be viewed from any position in

the room, with adequate lighting for students to take notes.



The PCs should have the Windows operating system (NT, 98, or 2000),

the Microsoft Office Suite (Professional edition), Netscape and

Internet Explorer Web Browsers, IIS or PWS, and FTP.  Students

should have access to an in laboratory UNIX Web Server with Apache

Web Server installed.  The laboratory must have Internet access, a

printer, and a scanner.



ACADEMIC INTEGRITY



A student who a) knowingly represents the work of others as his or

her own b) uses or obtains unauthorized assistance in the

execution of any work or c) completes work for another student is

guilty of cheating.  Violators will be penalized.



CLASSROOM CONDUCT



It is the students responsibility to attend all classes.  If a

student misses a class for any reason, it is his or her

responsibility to obtain materials that were handed out, to learn

the material that was covered, and to find out about any

announcements that were made in class



Students are expected to be on time for class.  If a student

arrives late, it is expected that they will take a seat close to

the door.



Students are expected to follow ordinary rules of courtesy during

class.  Private or side-bar  conversations, leaving class without

prior discussions with the professor (except for an emergency),

making unnecessary noise, or using a cellular telephone are

disruptive behaviors that will not be tolerated.



The college welcomes all students into environment that creates a

sense of community, pride, and respect we are all here to work

cooperatively and to learn together.



     

                                 
