            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Mercer County Community College



                       Course Outline



Course Number:      CIS 212



Course Title:            Advanced PC Business Applications



Division:           Business and Technology



Length of Semester:      15 weeks



Credits:            3



Lecture/Laboratory:      2/2



Text:                    Shelly Cashman Series Microsoft

Office 97

                    Advanced Concepts  Techniques (Word

97,

                    Excel 97, Access 97, and PowerPoint

97)



                    Authors:  Shelly/Cashman/Vermaat



                    Students will need (2) 3.5 high-density

diskettes



Catalog Description



Extensive hands-on experience on PCs working with charts

and tables, and desktop publishing using word processing

macros, templates, sorting, and filtering using

spreadsheets creating reports and forms using database

creating slides and images using presentation graphics.

Emphasis is on business usage and personal application.

Integration of applications included.



Prerequisite:  CIS 112 or equivalent





                              Carol Weber

                                 Course Coordinator



Fall 1999





Instructors Name 

Time/Location 

Office/Phone Nos. 

Office Hours 

BUS 242-Advanced PC Business Applications

2



Week 1 (Word 97)



     Creating a Document with a Title Page and Tables -

Project 4



     Homework Assignment

     Read:          WD4.1 through WD4.55

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page WD4.56



Week 2 (Word 97)



     Generating Form Letters, Mailing Labels, and Envelopes

-Project 5



     Homework Assignment

     Read:          WD5.1 through WD5.50

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page WD5.51



Week 3 (Word 97)



     Creating a Professional Newsletter - Project 6



     Homework Assignment

     Read:          WD6.1 through WD6.53

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page WD6.54

     Study:         Review and study Word 97 Projects 4, 5,

and 6 for first test



Week 4 (Word 97)



     Word Theory and Applications Tests (Projects 4, 5, and

6)



     Using WordArt to Add Special Text Effects to a Word

Document



Week 5 (Excel 97)



     Creating Templates, Workbooks with Multiple Worksheets,

and Web Pages-

     Project 4

     

     Read:          E4.3 through E4.53

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page E4.54

BUS 242-Advanced PC Business Applications

3



Week 6 (Excel 97)



     Data Tables, Visual Basic for Applications, Hyperlinks,

and Scenario Manager-

     Project 5



     Read:          E5.1 through E5.49

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page E5.50



Week 7 (Excel 97)



     Sorting and Filtering a Worksheet Database, Pivot

Tables, and Creating a

     Data Map-Project 6



     Read:          E6.1 through E6.52

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page E6.53

     Study:         Review and study Excel Projects 4, 5,

and 6 for test



Week 8 (Excel 97)



     Excel Theory and Applications Tests (Projects 4, 5, and

6)



     Embedding an Excel Worksheet into a Word Document Using

Drag and Drop



Week 9 (Access 97)



     Reports, Forms, and Publishing Reports to the

Web-Project 4



     Read:          A4.3 through A4.51

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page A4.52



Week 10 (Access 97)



     Enhancing Forms with OLE Fields, Hyperlinks, and

Subforms-Project 5



     Read:          A5.1 through A5.46

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page A5.47



Week 11 (Access 97)



     Creating an Application System Using Macros, VBA, and

the Switchboard

     Manager-Project 6



     Read:          A6.1 through A6.47

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page A6.48

     Study:         Review and study for Access 97

(Projects 4, 5, and 6) test

BUS 242-Advanced PC Business Applications

4



Week 12 (Access 97)



     Access Theory and Applications Tests (Projects 4, 5,

and 6)



     Linking Excel Worksheets to an Access Database



Week 13 (Power Point 97)



     Using Embedded Visuals to Enhance a Slide Show-Project

3



     Read:          PP3.3 through PP3.61

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page PP3.63



Week 14 (PowerPoint 97)



     Creating a Presentation Containing Interactive OLE

Documents-Project 4



     Read:          PP4.1 through PP4.60

     Complete: Student Assignment 1 and 2 on page PP4.61



Week 15-Final Project Presentations



Course Evaluation



     35--Objective Tests

     35--Performance Assessment Tests

     10--In-class Laboratory Assignments

     20--Final Project  Presentation



NOTE THE FOLLOWING GUIDELINES:



    All Computer Lab Assignments are to be completed in

  class.  However, if you need additional time, you will be

  expected to attend a scheduled open lab on campus or use a

  computer at home or work.



    All assignments must be complete no credit will be

  given for incomplete work.



    Assignments are to be submitted on time reduced credit

  will be given for projects submitted late.



Office Systems Technology Majors-Please Note



OST majors will develop a portfolio in OST 222-Current

Topics in Office Administration which will consist of a

selection of assigned projects from their required courses.

Portfolio projects will be chosen at the instructors

discretion.

                                                         5

               MERCER COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

                  OFFICE SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY

                              

          Class Attendance and Make-up Work Policy



The following criteria will be strictly adhered to with

regard to classroom attendance and assignments.



Absences:



     1.   Class attendance is mandatory for all students.

          However, it is recognized that

          occasionally an absence will be necessary.  Any

          student exceeding six (6) hours (not meetings) of

          absences will automatically be downgraded one

          grade level at the discretion of the instructor.



     2.   Three (3) consecutive absences from class without

          contacting the instructor may

          be considered cause for an automatic withdrawal

          from the course by the instructor.  If the reason

          is a medical excuse, the student is required to

          bring in a doctors note.



     3.   If a student decides to discontinue attending the

          course, it is the students

          responsibility to follow through and officially

          withdraw from the course before the withdrawal

          deadline date.  Failure to do this may result in

          the student receiving an F for the course.



Make-up Work:



     1.   All assignments are to be turned in on the date

          specified.  Late assignments will

          be downgraded unless reason for lateness is fully

          justified.



     2.   When absence from class is necessary, you are still

          responsible for making up for

          all delinquent assignments.  These assignments

          must be submitted within one week of your return.

          No assignments will be accepted after that time.



     3.   Students MUST be present for all scheduled tests.  If

          you are absent on a test day

          without justifiable reason, you will not be

          permitted to make up the test.  If your absence is

          excused, you are responsible for making up the

          test before the next class period.  You must make

          arrangements for making up the test outside of

          class.



     4.   Each students attendance is reported to the

          Registrars Office every four weeks.

          The Registrars Office is required by law to make

          attendance reports on students who are funded by

          Veterans Benefits, Social Security payments, and

          other federal/state and private scholarship

          programs.



Note:  Any exception to the above-stated policy can be made

at the discretion of the instructor on

           an individual basis.

                                                       6



Academic Integrity Statement:



A student who a.) knowingly represents work of others as

his/her own b.) uses or obtains unauthorized assistance in

the execution of any academic work, or c.) gives fraudulent

assistance to another person is guilty of cheating.

Violators will be penalized.  (Student Handbook)



Classroom Conduct Statement:



It is the students responsibility to attend all of their

classes.  If they miss a class meeting for any reason,

students are responsible for all content that is covered,

for announcements made in their absence, and for acquiring

any materials that may have been distributed in class.  It

is expected that students be on time for all their classes.

If students walk into a class after it has begun, it is

expected that they choose a seat close to where they entered

the room so that they do not disrupt the class meeting.



Students are expected to follow ordinary rules of courtesy

during the class sessions.  Engaging in private, side

conversations during class time is distracting to other

students and to the instructor.  Leaving class early without

having informed the instructor prior to class is not

appropriate.  Unless there is an emergency, leaving class

and returning while the class is in session is not

acceptable behavior.  Disruptive behavior of any type,

including sharpening pencils during class while someone is

speaking, is not appropriate.



The college welcomes all students into an environment that

creates a sense of community of pride and respect we are

all here to work cooperatively and to learn together.





-----------------------------7d6181392d0506--
