            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.









                 Mercer County Community College

                                

           Arts, Communication and Technology Division

                                

                             CIS 162

                                

                    ADVANCED E-COMMERCE  WEB SITES

                                

                                

                                

COURSE DESCRIPTION:

Explores the ways to construct the most intricate e-commerce

sites, from databases and mailing lists to sophisticated user

accounts.  Students create an operating business web site with a

database and secure contact with customers, Capstone project

included.











Text (s): Reference Division Booklist



Prerequisites:    CIS 161 - Building E-Commerce Web Sites



Co-requisites:    None



Credits:  3         Lecture Hours: 2         Studio/Lab Hours:  2



   Food and drink are strictly prohibited in classrooms as per

 health and safety laws.  Students may not bring in chemicals or

       cleaning fluids without the appropriate MSD sheets.











Course Coordinator: Winston H. Maddox             Latest Review:

8/2001





                                

                                

                                

                                



Recommended Grading:



5 Projects:  15 each

1 Capstone Project:  25



Required Materials:



Required Web Tutorials



General Objectives:



1.   To teach students to design a database and link it to a

website.

2.   To show students how to use and manage mailing lists for

marketing.

3.   To expose students to strategies for continuous contact with

customers.

4.   To teach students to create user accounts.



Topic 1:  Databases



E-businesses use a variety of databases:  Access, SQL Server and

Oracle.  Each type of database has its advantages and

disadvantages.  Luckily, there is a common language you learn to

talk to all of these databases:  SQL - Structured Query Language.

In this section students will learn to:

    Design a database.

    Create an access database.

    Use the most common SQL Queries - add data, extract data

  and alter data.



Topic 2:  Linking Web-Pages to Databases



Once your business has a database, the most intricate step is

connecting the database to your web-site.  In this section

students will learn to:



    Display information from a database using:

    Enter information into a database.

    Alter information in a database.



Students will accomplish these using:



    Perl

    Active Server Pages



Topic 3:  Creating Mailing Lists



A good way to notify customers of new products and services is to

use a mailing list.  In this segment students will learn how to

create and successfully use mailing lists, or listservs.



Topic 4:  Allowing Customization of Web-Pages



Yahoo, Amazon and Weather.com all allow users to customize the

home-page according to their interests.  This technique requires

the use of cookies and server-side programming.  In this section

students will:



    Learn how to place and extract cookies from the users

  computer.

    Use the content of cookies to customize the web-site.



Topic 5:  Creating User Accounts



The most powerful web-site allows users to create personal

account and then interact with the businesses database on a

personal level.  This topic will unify the previous topics.  Case

studies will include:



    An online bookseller.

    An online brokerage account.
