            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.




COURSE OUTLINE
Course NumberCourse TitleCreditsHOS 111              Culinary Math1Hours: lecture/Lab/Other 
1/0/0
Co- or Pre-requisite: None Implementation Spring/2010Catalog description (2009-2011 Catalog): 

Students will demonstrate a working knowledge of key math concepts related to culinary arts. Topics will include calculating yield percent, determining portion costs, periodic food costs, selling price determinations, weights and measures, changing recipe yields, and converting between metric and U.S.	Is course New, Revised, or Modified?  New courseRequired texts/other materials:

Textbook: Math Principals for Food Service Occupations, Anthony J Strianese,  published by Delmar Thompson Learning 5th edition ISBN: 9781418016463


Revision date:  Course coordinator:   Douglas Fee 570-3447 feed@mccc.edu

Information resources: (Describe the primary information resources that support the course, including books, videos, journals, electronic databases, websites, etc. To request new materials for your course, use the library request form at: www.mccc.edu/student_library_course_form.shtml)

NONE Required
Other learning resources:  (Describe any other student learning resources that are specific to this course, including any special tutoring or study group support, learning system software, etc.)

None Required

	







Course Competencies/Goals: 

The student will be able to:
1. Demonstrate a working knowledge of recipe conversions for increasing and decreasing yield
2. Demonstrate a working knowledge of using culinary specific calculators
3. Demonstrate a working knowledge of conversions between metric and standard measurements 
4. Demonstrate a working knowledge of conversions between Fahrenheit and Celsius
5. Practice the principles as related to calculations for recipe conversion including yield, food cost, and formula conversions.
6. Analyze and assess food and labor cost and the correlation between these costs and the overall budget in a food service operation.
7. Apply the principles required to help determine menu pricing and costing and demonstrate a working knowledge inthis area
8. Identify information required to calculate food cost percentage and demonstrate a working knowledge of food cost percentages 
9. Question and differentiate potential budget outcomes based yield, portion control, standard recipes and labor costs
10. Apply theory with practice by performing exercises related to common calculations in the hospitality industry including weights and measures, portion costs and yield tests 




Course-specific General Education Knowledge Goals and Core Skills. [To an extent consistent with its primary purposes, each course in every program is expected to reflect the college’s commitment to general education, as affirmed in the 2005 General Education Policy.  A General Education Course is one whose primary purposes and overall design coincide strongly with one or more of the approved general education goals and objectives.  For any approved (or proposed) General Education Course, the General Education Goals and Objectives form (the form identified as the “Gen Ed Attachment”) should be completed and attached to the course outline. Below is a complete list of Mercer’s General Education Knowledge Goals and Core Skills.  Retain on this course outline the Goals and Skills that pertain to your course and delete those that are not a central part of the course.]
General Education Knowledge Goals
                Goal 2. Mathematics. Students will use appropriate mathematical and statistical concepts and operations to interpret
                data and to solve problems.
Goal 4. Technology. Students will use computer systems or other appropriate forms of technology to achieve educational and personal goals.
Goal 9. Ethical Reasoning and Action. Students will understand ethical issues and situations.

MCCC Core Skills
Goal A. Written and Oral Communication in English. Students will communicate effectively in speech and writing, and demonstrate proficiency in reading.
Goal B. Critical Thinking and Problem-solving. Students will use critical thinking and problem solving skills in analyzing information.
Goal C. Ethical Decision-Making. Students will recognize, analyze and assess ethical issues and situations.
Goal D. Information Literacy. Students will recognize when information is needed and have the knowledge and skills to locate, evaluate, and effectively use information for college level work.
Goal E. Computer Literacy. Students will use computers to access, analyze or present information, solve problems, and communicate with others.
Goal F. Collaboration and Cooperation. Students will develop the interpersonal skills required for effective performance in group situations.








Units of study in detail. 

Unit I   Kitchen Calculations
The student will be able to…
• Demonstrate a working knowledge of measurements and measurement conversion formulas (Course competencies 1,3 :Gen Ed Goal 2   MCCC core skills B,D )
• Demonstrate a working knowledge of recipe conversions including the altering of yield (Course competencies 1, 2, 10 :Gen Ed Goal 2, 4   MCCC core skills B,D )
• Demonstrate a working knowledge to convert Fahrenheit and Celsius (Course competencies 4  :Gen Ed Goal 2   MCCC core skills B ) 

Unit II Menu Considerations
The student will be able to…
• Conduct a yield test and understand the information required and how to interpret the data to determine actual costs (Course competencies 2, 5 :Gen Ed Goal 2   MCCC core skills B, D )
• Demonstrate  a working knowledge Of unit and recipe costing formulas  (Course competencies 2, 8, 2, 10 :Gen Ed Goal 2   MCCC core skills B, D )
• Demonstrate a working understanding and understanding of menu pricing and apply the various theories of menu pricing strategies (Course competencies 2, 7, 8, 9 :Gen Ed Goal 2   MCCC core skills B, D, F )

Unit III Hospitality Budgeting
The student will be able to…
• Demonstrate a working knowledge of inventory and food cost percentages and apply these formulas as they are used in the hospitality industry (Course competencies 2, 6 :Gen Ed Goal  2  MCCC core skills B, D )
• Demonstrate a working knowledge of labor cost and labor cost percentage and apply these formulas as they are used in the hospitality industry (Course competencies 2, 6, 10 :Gen Ed Goal 2   MCCC core skills B, D ) 
• Complete a menu budget project as a group utilizing formulas and theories and ethical discussions to determine and justify a potential implications of budget scenario outcomes (Course competencies 2, 6, 10 :Gen Ed Goal 2, 9   MCCC core skills A,B, C, D, F )

Evaluation of student learning:    

Participation during class		10%
Unit Tests				30%
Homework and Quizzes		20%
Menu budget project			20%
Final exam				20%

Coursework will include work begun in class and completed by the student individually or as part of a group depending on the assignment. Tests will be given to determine if the students are retaining the information discussed in class and reinforced through assignments. A menu budget project will be used to assess the students understanding of the math formulas learned and how the formulas learned are to be applied mathematically and the potential implications the budget numbers would have on employees. 





Academic Integrity Statement:  

Any student who a) knowingly represents work of others as his/her own. b) uses or obtains unauthorized assistance in the execution of any academic work, c) or gives fraudulent assistance to another student is guilty of cheating. Violators will be penalized in accordance with established college policies and procedures. 

Please make every attempt to come to all class sessions, to come on time and stay until the end of the class unless you have notified the instructor you are leaving early. There may be a time when 
you are unavoidably late for class or leave early. If that is the case please choose a seat near the room 
entrance. Once the class session has begun, please do not leave the room and re-enter unless it is 
an emergency. If you must miss a class it is you are still responsible for all material covered, for announcements made in your absence and for acquiring any materials that may have been distributed 
in class. It is important to stay focused on the class discussion. For this reason, only one person at a 
time in the class should be speaking. Side conversations are distracting for surrounding students and 
the instructor. Please also remember to turn off any pager or cell phone, or set it to vibrate so you
do not distract the class. 



MCCC New/Revised Course Proposal		Page 4 of 4



Revised: 10/2008
		

