            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.





COURSE OUTLINE





 IST 255                   Data Mining                 4 

Course Number                  Course Title                          Credits





 3      2        N/A          N/A       15

Class or   Laboratory             Clinical or Studio Practicum,     Course 
Length Lecture Work Hours  Hours Co-op, Internship      (15 week, Hours      
               10 week, etc.) 

     



                 Not Applicable                                Not 
Applicable 

Performance on an Examination/Demonstration                            
Alternate Delivery Methods 

(Placement Score (if applicable) minimum CLEP score)                 
(Online, Telecourse give title of videos) 



Required Materials:

Data Mining with SQL Server 2005 by ZhaoHui Tang and Jamie MacLennan by 
Wiley Publishing. ISBN: 0-471-46261-6 



Data Mining  A Tutorial Based Primer by Richard J. Roiger, Michael W. Geatz



Additional Material



The Data Warehouse Toolkit -- The Complete Guide to Dimensional Modeling, 
2nd edition, Ralph Kimball and Margy Ross, published by Wiley Computer 
Publishing, ISBN 0-471-20024-7. 



Flash Drive



Catalog Description: 

Data mining course equips students with a sound understanding of data mining 
principles and proven methods for knowledge discovery in large corporate 
databases. This course deals with a comprehensive and state-of-the-art 
coverage of data mining concepts and techniques which includes OLAP (On-line 
Analytical Processing) technology, data characterization, classification, 
association rules, cluster Analysis, and time series. Class project involves 
hands-on practice of mining useful knowledge from a large database using 
several commercial data mining systems including the Analysis Services 
component of Microsoft SQL Server. Also students work on projects iDA 
Dataset package. 



Prerequisites:  BUS 205              Corequisites: BUS 206



Last Revised:  03/20/06 



Course Coordinator (name, email, phone extension):  

Assistant Professor Queen E. Okike

okikeqmccc,edu

Extension   3464



Available Resources: (Identify library resources relevant to the course, 
including books, videos, journals, electronic databases, recommended 
websites.) 



Course Goals.  

The student will be able to:



 Understand what data mining is and how data mining can be employed to solve 
real problem. 



 Recognize whether a data mining solution is a feasible alternative for a 
specific problem. 



 Download SQL Server 2005 and install the Analysis Services component. 



 Apply iDa Dataset software to solve real problems.



 Step through the knowledge discovery process and write a report about the 
results of a data mining session. 



 Apply basic statistical and non-statistical techniques to evaluate the 
results of a data session. 



 Recognize several data mining strategies and know when each strategy is 
appropriate. 



 Develop a comprehensive understanding of how several data mining techniques 
build models. 



 Develop general awareness about the structure of a data warehouse and how a 
data warehouse can be used to enhance business opportunities. 



 Explain what on-line analytical processing (OLAP) is and how it can be 
applied to analyze data. 



 Recognize that expert systems represent general models that emulate human 
actions. 



 Apply the use of a goal tree to help design a rule-based system.



 Recognize that intelligent agents are computer programs able to assist with 
every day task. 



 Identify the types of problems that can be solved by combining an expert 
system problem-solving approach and data mining strategy. 







COURSE CONTENT



Unit IData Mining Fundamentals

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to:

- Identify business problems for Data Mining

- Identify Data Mining tasks

- Identify  Data Mining techniques, Data flow and Data Mining Project cycle

- Identify Data Mining  and the current market current issues and challenges

- Recognize mining standards

- Describe OLE DB for DM and XML for analysis



Unit IIOLE DB for Data Mining

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to:

- Explain why OLE DB is used in Data Mining 

- Explore the basic concept of OLE DB for Data Mining

- Identify step to Data Mining Extensions (DMX)

- Explain Schema Row sets and extension for mining structures



 Unit IIISQL Data Mining

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to:

- Identity Business Intelligence Development Studio

- Explain user interface, offline mode and immediate mode

- Create Data Mining objects, set up data source 

- Create and edit models

- Process the data and create reports

- Explore SQL Server Management Studio



Unit IVMicrosoft Nave Bayes and Decision Trees

Learning Objectives

The student will be able to:

- Discuss Microsoft Nave Bayes Algorithm, Principles and Parameters

- Explain Microsoft Nave Bayes content

- Explore  Microsoft Nave Bayes model

- Explain Decision tree and its principles

- Identify Algorithm parameters

- Create Decision trees and DMX Queries



















Unit VMicrosoft Time Series and Microsoft Clustering

Learning Objectives

The student will be able to:

- Explain Microsoft Time Series algorithm, principles and parameters

- Create Microsoft Time series

- Explain Microsoft Clustering algorithm and principles of Clustering

- Explain Clustering parameters

- Create Clustering models

- Identify Clustering as analytical step

- Explore cluster models



Unit VI Microsoft Sequence Clustering and Microsoft Association Rules

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to:

- Explain Microsoft Sequence Clustering algorithm

- Explain Microsoft Sequence Clustering algorithm principles 

- Explain Microsoft Sequence Clustering algorithm parameters

- Create Microsoft Sequence Clustering algorithm

- Explain Microsoft Association Rules

- Explain Microsoft Association Rules algorithm principles 

- Explain basic Microsoft Association Rules concepts

- Create Microsoft Association Algorithm



Unit VIIMicrosoft Neural Network and Mining OLAP Cubes

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to:

- Explain principles of Microsoft Neural Network algorithm

- Explain Microsoft Neural Network algorithm parameters

- Create DMX queries

- Recognize model content

- Interpret the model 

- Explain OLAP

- Identify relationship between OLAP and Data Mining

- Build OLAP Mining models using Wizards and Editors 

- Explain Data Mining  dimensions

- Create MDX inside DMX Queries

- Create Analysis Management Objects for OLAP mining model











Unit VIIIData Mining with SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS)

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to:

- Explain Data Mining with SQL Server Integration Services 

- Identify SSIS packages 

- Explain SSIS task flow and data flow

- Explain data mining in SSIS environment

- Explain data mining tasks and data mining transforms

- Explain SQL Server data mining architecture

- Recognize processing architecture and data mining administration



Unit IX Programming SQL Server Data Mining

Learning Objectives

The student will be able to:

- Explain Data Mining APIs (Application programming interfaces) 

- Explain analysis services APIs

- Create and manage models using Microsoft Analysis Services

- Browse and query mining models

- Implement Web Cross-Selling Application

- Describe source data and build model

- Make predictions and integrate predictions into Web application



Unit X Advanced Forecasting using Microsoft Excel

Learning Objectives

The student will be able to:

- Configure Analysis Services for Session Models 

- Identify the Advanced Forecasting Tool 

- Explain ExcelTimeSeries Add-In Architecture 

- Build the Input Data Set

- Create XMLA (XML for Analysis)

- Create and train the mining model 

- Connect to the Data Mining Engine 

- Create and train the mining mode ExcelTimeSeriesMining CreateModel 
Implementation 

- Forecast the series

- Explain Plug-in algorithms

- Identify Data Mining Viewers

Evaluation of Student Learning

Weekly class attendance and participation10

Average of weekly homework and laboratory assignments50

Four Units of Tests:

Units I, II10

Units III, IV10

Units V, VI, VII 10

Units VIII, IX, X10



Total                                     100 



















Grade Policy





Grade


Definition


Nominal




QPA

quality point value
A
Superior Achievement
93-100
4
A-

90-92
3.7
B

87-89
3.4
B
Above Average Achievement
83-86
3
B-

80-82
2.7
C

77-79
2.4
C 
Average Achievement
70-76
2
D
Minimally Passing
60-69
1
F
Academic Failure
0-59
0
X
Audit  no evaluation

N/A
W
Withdrawal (Student-initiated)

N/A
WI
Withdrawal (Instructor-initiated)

N/A
WA
Withdrawal (Administration-initiated)

N/A
N
No grade reported by the instructor

N/A
I
Incomplete  no credit earned

N/A


Audit:

If you audit the course, you will receive an X gradethis cannot be changed 
to 

a letter grade at a later date.



Withdrawal Course Requirements:

To receive a W grade for any course, a student must consult with the course

instructor or an appropriate division representative and then withdraw 
officially 

before two-thirds of the course has been completed by submitting a 
withdrawal 

form to the Office of Student Records. Withdrawal after this point results 
in a 

grade other than W (usually F). At any time before two-thirds of the course 
has 

been completed, the instructor may also withdraw with a W grade any student

who has been absent excessively. A student thus withdrawn will not be 
entitled 

to any refund of tuition or fees. The student may appeal this action.



Attendance Policy

Mercer County Community College does not have a cut system. Students are

expected to attend all classes of every course on their schedules. Only 
illness or 

serious personal matters may be considered adequate reasons for absence.

It is the prerogative of the instructor to excuse absences for valid 
reasons, provided the 

student will be able to fulfill all course requirements.



Student performance in classes is formally verified at each class meeting. 
If a students 

attendance has been infrequent or performance unsatisfactory, he or she may 
receive 

MCCC Course Outline

notification in the mail. At any time, the instructor may withdraw the 
student from class 

for insufficient attendance.



Classroom Conduct Statement

It is the students responsibility to attend all classes. If a student misses 
a class meeting 

for any reason, he/she is responsible for all content that is covered, for 
announcements 

made, and for acquiring any materials that may have been distributed in 
class. It is 

expected that students be on time for all classes. Students who walk into 
class after it 

has begun are expected to choose seats close to where they entered the room 
so that 

they do not disrupt the class meeting.



Students are expected to follow ordinary rules of courtesy during the class 
sessions. 

Engaging in private, side conversations during class time is distracting to 
other students 

and to the instructor. Leaving class early without having informed the 
instructor prior to 

class is not appropriate. Unless there is an emergency, leaving class and 
returning 

while the class is in session is not acceptable behavior. Disruptive 
behavior of any type, 

including sharpening pencils during class while someone is speaking, is not 
appropriate. 



The college welcomes all students into an environment that creates a sense 
of 

community of pride and respect we are here to work cooperatively and to 
learn 

together.



Academic Integrity Statement

A student who knowingly represents work of others as his/her own, uses or 
obtains 

unauthorized assistance in the execution of any academic work, or gives 
fraudulent 

assistance to another student is guilty of cheating. The penalty for 
violating the honor 

code is severe. (See Student Handbook.) Any student violating the honor code 
is 

subject to receive a failing grade for the course and will be reported to 
the Office of 

Student Affairs. If a student is unclear about whether a particular 
situation may 

constitute an honor code violation, the student should meet with the 
instructor to discuss 

the situation.



It is permissible to assist classmates in general discussions of computing 
techniques 

general advice and interaction are encouraged. Each person, however, must 
develop 

his or her own solutions to the assigned homework and laboratory exercises. 
Students 

may not work together on graded assignments. Such collaboration constitutes

cheating, unless it is a group assignment. A student may not use or copy (by 
any 

means) anothers work (or portions of it) and represent it as his/her own.

            LIBERAL ARTS DIVISION                               HY 101 - 
page 
