            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

4

IST237 Java Programming





                                                                 

                                                                 

                 Mercer County Community College

                                

           Arts, Communication and Technology Division

                                

                             IST 237

                                

                        JAVA PROGRAMMING

                                

                                

                                

                                



COURSE DESCRIPTION



An introduction to JAVA programming and applications on the World

Wide  Web.   Students  will  write,  compile,  and  execute  JAVA

programs.   The course will explore the development  of  platform

independent graphical user interfaces with JAVA tools.













Text (s): Reference Division Booklist



Prerequisites:  Competency in object oriented programming

language such as Visual Basic,

          Powerbuilder or C



Co-requisites:



Credits:  3         Lecture Hours: 2         Studio/Lab Hours:  2





Food  and  drink  are strictly prohibited in  classrooms  as  per

health  and safety laws.  Students may not bring in chemicals  or

cleaning fluids without the appropriate MSD sheets.







Course Coordinator: Winston H. Maddox             Latest Review:

Fall 2003

GRADING



There will be 5 programming assignments and four tests

contributing to your grade.  There will be no makeup test.

Project assignments will be made at appropriate times during the

semester.



     Projects will comprise 60 of the final grade.

     Test will comprise 40 of the final grade.





JAVA PROGRAMMING



WEEK 1:   Introducing JAVA

               Language Fundamentals

               Keywords and Identifiers

               Primitive Data Types, Operators, Assignment

               Literal, Strings, Arrays

               Program Structure and Environment

                Packages,  Classes and Fields, Flow  Control  and

Exceptions

               How Java Differs from C and C



WEEK 2:   Object Oriented Programming

               Theory and Technique



WEEK 3:   Classes and Objects

               Introduction to Classes and Objects

                Object Creation and Destruction, Class Variables,

Class Methods

               Modifiers, Subclasses and Interfaces



WEEK 4:   Overriding Methods, Data Handling and Encapsulation

               Abstract Classes and Interfaces

               Converting and Casting, Java Errors and Exception



WEEK 5:   Programming with the Java API

               Applets, Drawing Graphics

                 Handling   Events,  Reading  Applet  Parameters,

Animation

               java.applet Package

               java.awt Package

               java.awt.event Package

               java.lang Package

               java.net Package

               java.util Package





WEEK 6:   Programming with the Java API Contd.

WEEK 7:   Graphical User Interface

               All Java GUI Components

               Visual Components, Container Components

               Menu Components, Handling GUI Events



WEEK 8:   Graphical User Interface Contd.



WEEK 9:   Input and Output

                Reading  and Displaying Files, Getting  Directory

and File Information

               Copying a File, Filtering Input, Pipes



WEEK 10:  Threads

               Threads and Thread Groups, Deadlock



WEEK 11:  Networking

               Downloading the Contents of URL

                 Using  URL  Connection,  Sending  and  Receiving

Datagrams

               Implementing Client/Server



WEEK 12:  Introduction to Java Beans

               Bean Basics



WEEK 13:  Introduction to JDBC

                Accessing Database, Building Database, Using  API

Database



WEEK 14:  Images in Java Applets and application

               Smooth Animation

               Keeping Track of Images

               Filtering Images



WEEK 15:  Building Web Pages

               Basics of Web Pages

               Structure of an HTML Page





ACADEMIC INTEGRITY STATEMENT



A student who a.) knowingly represents work of others as his/her

own b.) uses or obtains unauthorized assistance in the execution

of  any  work  or  c.)  gives fraudulent assistance  to  another

student  is  guilty  of cheating. Violators will  be  penalized.

(Student Handbook)



CLASSROOM CONDUCT STATEMENT



It  is  the  students  responsibility to  attend  all  of  their

classes.  If  they miss a class meeting for any reason,  students

are   responsible   for  all  content  that   is   covered,   for

announcements  made  in  their absence,  and  for  acquiring  any

materials that may have been distributed in class. It is expected

that  students be on time for all their classes. If students walk

into  a class after it had begun, it is expected that they choose

a  seat  close  to where they entered the room  so  they  do  not

disrupt the class meeting.



Students are expected to follow ordinary rules of courtesy during

class  session.  Engaging in private, side  conversations  during

class   time  is  distracting  to  other  students  and  to   the

instructor.  Leaving  class  early without  having  informed  the

instructor prior to class is not appropriate. Unless there is  an

emergency, leaving class and returning while class is in  session

is  not  acceptable behavior. Disruptive behavior  of  any  type,

including  sharpening  pencils  during  class  while  someone  is

speaking, is not appropriate.



The  college  welcomes  all  students into  an  environment  that

creates  a sense of community and pride and respect we  are  all

here to work cooperatively and to learn together.
