            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



1







                   Mercer County Community

College                                              Liberal

                        Arts Division

                              

                              

                       Course Outline





    MAT 145                   Precalculus  for Business or

Social Sciences                  4

Course Number                                  Course

Title                                     Credits







4

                                         15 weeks

Class or lecture

hours

                    Semester length







Required Materials



Book:  Precalculus, 6th edition

            by Larson and Hostetler

            Houghton Mifflin Publishers



Calculator:  Graphing calculator required (TI-83 or 86

recommended, no calculator with algebraic manipulation

permitted).





Catalog Description:  A second course in the mathematics

sequence leading to business or social sciences calculus.

Topics include polynomial, rational, and piecewise defined

functions, equations and inequalities: exponential and

logarithmic functions and their graphs multivariable

systems of equations and matrices extensive use of modeling

and graphing calculators.





Latest Review:  Fall 2003



Prerequisites:  MAT 141 with a minimum C grade or

equivalent.  Credit will be given for only one of MAT 145 or

MAT 146.  Co-requisites:  None





Course Coordinator:  Edith Silver













                      Course Objectives



  1.   To develop the understanding that functions are

     statements of how a change in one quantity brings about a

     change in another quantity.

2.   To develop the skill and understanding of reading and

making graphs of functions.

3.   To develop the understanding that technology has

brought about changes in mathematics by the storing of data

from which models of events in our daily life can be

developed and from which predictions can be made.

4.   To develop the understanding that, given certain

conditions under which two or more quantities are related,

optimum solutions to problems can be obtained graphically

and algebraically.

5.   To develop the understanding that mathematics plays an

important role in various fields and the ability to transfer

mathematical algorithims and techniques from problems in one

field to that of another.

6.   To develop the skill of analyzing problems and

synthesizing information in another situation.

7.   To develop the skill of making quantitative estimations

that are appropriate for a given situation.

8.   To develop the ability to work with others on projects

and to contribute to the outcome of the project.

9.   To develop the mathematical and logical skills

necessary for a course in calculus.

10.  To develop quantitative and logical skills for everyday

living.

  

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              



                   Course Outline  MAT 145



Unit I  Functions and Their Graphs (1.1 - 1.9)   3.5  weeks



            A.  You should be able to define, state, or

identify



          1.   graph of an equation

2.   intercepts

3.   symmetry

4.   linear equations in 2 variables

5.   slope

6.   slope intercept form of a linear equation

7.   point slope form of a linear equation

8.   general form of a linear equation

9.   parallel lines

10.  perpendicular lines

11.  relation

12.  function

13.  domain

14.  range

15.  independent variable

16.  dependent variable

17.  function notation

18.  implied domain

19.  vertical line test

20.  zeros, roots and solutions of a function

21.  relative minimum

22.  relative maximum

23.  symmetry in even functions

24.  symmetry in odd functions

25.  vertical and horizontal shifts of a graph

26.  stretches and compressions of a graph

27.  reflections of a graph about the x or y axes

28.  inverse functions, notation and symmetry

29.  horizontal line test

30.  one to one function

31.  direct proportion or variation

32.  inverse variation

33.  joint variation



     B.   You should be able to

     

       1.   sketch the graph of an equation and confirm the sketch

          by choosing an

          appropriate   viewing  window  on   the   graphing

          calculator

       2.   find the intercepts, symmetry, domain, and range,

          identify types of symmetry and confirm each on the graphing

          calculator

       3.   make a table of values on the graphing calculator for a

          given equation

4.   write the equation of a circle in standard form given

its center and a point on the circle and sketch the graph

5.   find the slope of a line and use it to graph the line

6.   use slope to identify parallel or perpendicular lines

7.   write the equation of a line when given a point on the

line and its slope or two points on the line

8.   write a linear equation in slope intercept or standard

form

       9.   determine whether a relation is a function when given a

          set of ordered pairs, an equation, or a graph

       10.  use function notation to evaluate functions

       11.  determine the domain and range of a function and the

          implied domain, if applicable

       12.  evaluate a difference quotient given in function

          notation when given the function

13.   find the zeros, roots and solutions of a function

14.  determine the intervals where the function is

increasing, decreasing, or constant

15.  identify even or odd functions

       16.  find relative extrema for a given function and confirm

          by using the maximum or minimum functions on the graphing

          calculator

       17.  recognize the equations and graphs of basic types of

          functions such as

          linear,  constant, identity, square or  quadratic,

          cubic,  square  root, reciprocal,  absolute  value

          and greatest integer function

            18.  sketch  the  graph of a  piecewise  defined

function and confirm on the

                        graphing calculator

                   19.  analyze the effect of and  determine

vertical and horizontal shifts,

                           stretches   and   shrinks,    and

reflections about the axes of a basic graph

       20.  find the equation for the sum, difference, product, or

          quotient of two  given functions and determine the domain of

          each

21.  find the composite of two given functions and determine

the domain of the composite

       22.  find two functions, f and g, such that  for a given

          function h

23.  find the inverse and its domain and range of a given

one to one function and verify that two functions f(x) and

g(x) are inverses of each other by showing f(g(x))  x  and

g(f(x))  x

24.  determine whether a given set of ordered pairs, given

graph, or given

                         equation is a one to one function

       25.  graph a function and its inverse on the same axes and

          graph the line

                         of symmetry y  x

       26.  use mathematical models to analyze sets of data

27.  write mathematical models for direct variation, inverse

variation,

                         and joint variation

       28.  use the regression function of a graphing calculator to

          find the equation of a least squares regression line

29.  solve applications/word problems which assess all of

the above topics

30.  pass a unit test





Unit  II Polynomial and Rational Functions (2.1 - 2.6) (omit

2.7)                3 weeks



             A.   You  should be able to define,  state,  or

identify



          1.   polynomial function and its degree

2.   parabola

3.   vertex (h,k) of a parabola

4.   standard form of a quadratic function

5.   continuity of a polynomial function

6.   zeros, roots or solutions of a polynomial and their

multiplicity k

7.   Intermediate Value Theorem

8.   Remainder Theorem

9.   Factor Theorem

          10.  complex numbers

          11.  Fundamental Theorem of Algebra

12.  Linear Factorization Theorem

13.  Rational Zeros Test

14.  Descartes Rule of Signs

15.  upper and lower bounds on real zeros

16.  rational functions

17.  discontinuity of a rational function

18.  vertical asymptotes

19.  horizontal asymptotes

20.  slant or oblique asymptotes

21.  synthetic division





            B.  You should be able to



       1.   sketch the graph of a polynomial or rational function

          and confirm the sketch by choosing an appropriate viewing

          window on the graphing calculator

       2.   put a quadratic function in standard form to identify

          the vertex, and  intercepts to aid in graphing it

3.   identify the vertex of a parabola from its graph and

write its equation in standard form

4.   use transformations to assist in sketching the graph of

a given polynomial function

5.   determine the left and right end behavior of a

polynomial using the degree and leading coefficient

       6.    find all real zeros of a polynomial or rational

          function and their multiplicity and confirm the zeros by

          using the root or zero function on the graphing

          calculator

7.   describe the behavior of the graph of a polynomial at a

zero with an odd or even multiplicity

8.   write an equation of a polynomial having given zeros

and a given degree

9.   perform algebraic long division and synthetic division

of polynomials

10.  evaluate a polynomial by using the remainder theorem

and synthetic division

       11.  find, if possible, all the zeros and their multiplicity

          of a polynomial function with real coefficients and write

          the polynomial as a product of linear and irreducible

          quadratic factors over the real numbers using the Rational

          Zeros Theorem and upper and lower bounds on the zeros

       12.  determine if two complex numbers are equal

13.  add, subtract, and multiply complex numbers

14.  use complex conjugates to write the quotient of two

complex numbers in standard form

15.  find complex solutions of quadratic equations

       16.  use Descartes Rule of Signs to determine the possible

          number of positive and negative zeros a polynomial has

17.  find the upper and lower bounds on the real zeros for a

given polynomial

       18.  find the domain, range, vertical, horizontal, and/or

          oblique asymptotes, if any, for a given rational function

19.  solve applications that result in equations which are

polynomial or rational functions

20.  pass a unit test





Unit  III  - Exponential and Logarithmic Functions   (3.1  -

3.5)               3.5weeks



             A.   You  should be able to define,  state,  or

identify



          1.   algebraic functions

2.   transcendental functions

3.   exponential function with base b or e

4.   continuously compounded interest and interest

compounded n times annually

5.   logarithmic functions with base a, base 10, or base e

6.   common logarithms

7.   natural logarithms

8.   change of base formula

9.   properties of logarithms



            B.  You should be able to



          1    graph a given exponential function or logarithmic

            function, indicate its domain and range, x or y intercept,

            describe it as increasing or decreasing and identify any

            asymptotes the graph has

          2.   perform vertical and horizontal shifts, stretches and

            shrinks and     reflections when given an exponential or

            logarithmic function together with its graph

3.   convert a given equation from exponential to equivalent

log form or from log to equivalent exponential form

4.   simplify and evaluate log expressions

5.   write a given expression as a single log using the

properties of logarithms

6.   use the change of base formula to find the log of any

number in any base > 0 using base 10 or base e

7.   solve applications that result in exponential or log

equations such as radioactive decay, bacterial growth,

compound interest, decibel level, earthquake intensity, etc.

8.   solve exponential equations by converting to log form

or by converting to the same base and equating  exponents

9.   solve log equations by converting to exponential form

or by using

                               the properties of logs

          10.  use a graphing calculator to solve exponential and log

            equations

11.  recognize exponential growth, exponential decay,

Gaussian, logistic

            growth,  and  logarithmic models and  use  these

            models          to          solve          given

            problems

            

            

          13.    pass a unit test





Unit IV - Systems of Equations and Inequalities (7.1 - 7.5)

(Note:    omit   partial   fraction   problems    in    7.3)

3 weeks



     A.   You should be able to define, state, or identify

     

       1.   system of 2 linear equations in 2 variables

2.   solution of a system of equations

3.   points of intersection and graphing method of solution

4.   substitution method of solution

5.   break-even point

6.   elimination by addition or subtraction method

7.   equivalent systems

8.   consistent systems

9.   inconsistent systems

10.  independent systems

11.  dependent systems

12.  row-echelon form

13.  ordered triple

14.  Gaussian elimination method

15.  nonsquare systems of equations

16.  linear inequalities

17.  solution of an inequality

18.  graph of an inequality

19.  solution of a system of inequalities

20.  linear programming

21.  optimization

22.  objective function

23.  constraints

24.  feasible solutions

25.  optimal feasible solution



     B.     You should be able to

       

          1.   solve a system of 2 equations in 2 variables by

            graphing and finding the points of intersection, if any.  If

            a special case results (same line or parallel lines or no

            intersection) you should be able to identify the system as

            dependent or inconsistent or having no  solution

            respectively.

2.   solve a system by substitution which works best if at

least one equation has one variable with a coefficient of  

1

3.   solve a system by addition or subtraction to eliminate

one of the variables

4.   use back substitution to solve linear systems in row-

echelon form

5.   use Gaussian elimination to solve systems of linear

equations

6.   solve nonsquare systems of linear equations and write

the solution as an ordered triple in terms of  an

independent variable

7.   sketch the graphs of inequalities in 2 variables and

shade the solution region

8.   solve systems of inequalities and shade the solution

region for the system and describe the solution as bounded

or unbounded

9.   solve a linear programming problem by identifying the

objective function or the quantity to be optimized, setting

up a system of linear

            constraints  or  inequalities,  graphing   their

            intersection  to determine the vertices  of  the

            set   of  feasible  solutions  and  substituting

            these  vertex  points in the objective  function

            to see which gives the optimal value

          10.  solve applications that result in systems of equations

            or inequalities or linear programming  problems and use a

            graphing calculator where possible to aid in each of these

            topics

11.  pass a unit test







Unit  V  -  Matrices and Determinants (8.1, 8.4, 8.5)(  omit

8.2,8.3)      2 weeks



     A.     You should be able to define, state, or identify

     

          1.      matrix

          2.      order of a matrix (m x n)

          3.      square matrix

          4.      column matrix

          5.      row matrix

          6.      entry of a matrix notation (aij)

          7.      augmented matrix

          8.      coefficient matrix

          9.      row equivalent matrices

          10.  principal or main diagonal of a matrix

          11.  elementary row operations

          12.  row-echelon form

          13.  reduced row echelon form

          14.  Gauss-Jordan elimination method

          15.  determinant of a square matrix

          16.  minors

          17.  cofactors

          18.  Cramers Rule

          



B.  You should be able to



          1.   write a matrix and identify its order

2.   perform elementary row operations on matrices

3.   use the augmented matrix for a system and the Gaussian

elimination

            or  the Gauss Jordan elimination method to solve

            a system of linear            equations

          4.     describe   an  entry  in  a  matrix   using

     aij notation

          5.   find the determinant of a 2x2 matrix

          6.   find minors and cofactors of square matrices

7.   find determinants of an n x n square matrix

8.   use Cramers Rule to solve a system of linear equations

9.   solve applications that result in systems of equations



Assignments



The student is expected to do the following:

     1.   Take class notes which should be kept in a notebook or

       binder.

2.   Read and study sections in the text which are discussed

in class.

3.   Solve all odd numbered problems (or those assigned by

the instructor) at the end of sections of the text that are

covered in class.

4.   Participate in group work and projects given by the

instructor.

5.   Seek help from the instructor, the math learning

center, or a tutor if necessary.







Evaluation and Grading



The  tests, projects and exams will vary somewhat  to  allow

for   individual  creativity  and  professionalism  of   the

instructor.   A  typical  plan is  five  unit  tests  and  a

comprehensive final exam.
