            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.





COURSE OUTLINE







    MAT120                                Mathematics for Liberal Arts

Course Number                     Course Title



33 lecture hours

CreditsHours





Catalog description: Relates basic mathematical concepts to current issues 
and applications of interest to liberal arts majors.  Concepts include 
critical thinking, problem solving techniques, number sense and estimation, 
and geometry.   Intended primarily for students in non-scientific / 
non-technical majors.          3 lecture hours 







Prerequisites:  MAT034 with a minimum C grade or appropriate placement test 
score. 



Corequisites:  None







Required texts/other materials: 

1. Text:  Using and Understanding Mathematics: A Quantitative Reasoning 
Approach,      by Jeffrey O. Bennett and William L. Briggs, 3rd ed., Pearson 
Education 2006. 

2. Scientific Calculator







Last revised:  N/A 







Course coordinator:   Prof. Paul Toppo







Information resources: 



 Instructors Solution Manual: This publication gives detailed solutions to 
even-numbered exercises from the text. 



 Students Solution Manual: This publication gives detailed solutions to

      odd-numbered exercises from the text.



 Access to the companion website for the text

      http://wps.aw.com/awbennettusingandun3

      

 Access to the text of FLATLAND by Edwin Abbott Abbott

http://www.ibiblio.org/eldritch/eaa/FL.HTM



 The library currently has several books available in support of the primary 
text. 

 

 Abbott, Edwin. Flatland. Signet Classics

 S.M., Dowdy. Mathematics: Art And Science. 1971

 Gloria, Olive. Mathematics For Liberal Arts Students. 1973

 Fred, Richman. Mathematics For The Liberal Arts Student. 1967

 John W., Bishir. Mathematics In The Behavioral And Social Sciences. 1970

 Lawrence, Spector. Liberal Arts Mathematics. 1971





 References to the following web pages:

http://www.zweigmedia.com/ThirdEdSite/tcfinitep.html

Stefan Waner and Steven R. Costenoble  On-Line Resources.



http://infotrac.thomsonlearning.com/pdf/HSMathematics.pdf

Free database, resource center and mathematical writing tutorial offered by 
Thomson. 

 http://www-math.cudenver.edu/wbriggs/qr/qrtop.html

A web site devoted to Quantitative Literacy and Quantitative Reasoning. 
Ideas, problems, news stories, case studies, and links to other QR/QL 
Internet sites and some information about the book, Using and Understanding 
Mathematics - A Quantitative Reasoning Approach, Third Edition, Addison 
Wesley Longman (2005), by Jeffrey Bennett and William Briggs. 



 Gilbert and Hatcher. Mathematics Beyond The Numbers. Wiley and Sons. 2000









COURSE GOALS:



Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:



1. Develop and strengthen quantitative reasoning skills and apply them to 
other disciplines. 

2. Recognize and utilize the logical underpinnings in mathematics.

3. Understand and apply the theory of sets.

4. Acquire and develop a mathematical sense, or intuition.

5. Analyze, model and interpret real-world problems in mathematical terms.

6. Analyze and evaluate written arguments, using propositional logic..

7. Assess and evaluate data.

8. Compare and contrast linear and exponential models of growth and decay.

9.  Define and understand basic concepts of geometry.

10.  Identify, describe and apply geometrical models to real world 
situations. 

11.  Apply the foregoing skills and techniques to the mathematics of music 
and politics. 



Course-specific General Education goals and objectives 

 Critical thinking, problem solving and information literacy: 

Students will use critical thinking and problem solving skills in analyzing 
information gathered through different media and from a variety of sources. 

Through the study of equations, graphs and matrices of relations in data, 
the student will practice organizing and analyzing data in a way that can 
lead to valid conclusions. 

Internet Exercises are provided on the companion website to the text and 
require searching for data or other information on the web.  The authors of 
the text have provided a comprehensive list of web links and associated 
exercises to accompany each topic. 

 Communication: Students will communicate effectively in writing:

Projects requiring group participation foster evaluation, revision and 
editing of solutions. 

Written assignments in the course: 

- a project that includes an essay of at least 1100 words, 

- homework assignments which include short essay questions in addition to 
some application and exploration problems, 

- exam questions that require explanation and/or justification, in full 
sentences, of solutions. 

 

Quantitative skills: Students will apply appropriate mathematical concepts 
and operations to interpret data and to solve problems. 



Students will demonstrate competence in the use of numerical, graphical, and 
algebraic representations. 



Students will demonstrate the ability to interpret data, analyze graphical 
information, and communicate solutions in written and oral form. 



Students will demonstrate proficiency in the use of mathematics and algebra 
to formulate and solve problems. 



 Science and technology: 

The main thrust of this and other mathematics courses is to take what is 
given and, by the use of the scientific method, to arrive at a valid 
conclusion. 

Students will demonstrate proficiency in using scientific calculators to 
support their use of mathematics. 







GENERAL COURSE STRUCTURE: The method of instruction is primarily lecture, 
but will include collaborative in and out of class work. The outline is 
flexible enough to permit other than traditional pedagogical methods to be 
used freely, at the discretion of the instructor. The suggested evaluation 
instrument consists of five tests and a comprehensive final exam, group 
assignments, short projects, and a final project. A typical rubric for the 
instrument follows the unit by unit outline. 



A suggested day-to-day schedule based on a 45 hour semester course are 
available from the course coordinator. This includes a test bank and 
suggested exercises from the text as well as a set of short projects. 



The general course outline consists of five units:



Unit I:

 (12 hours) Problem Solving-Thinking Critically (1A-1E, 2A, 2C) 



1. Introduction to logic arguments and fallacies.

2. Propositions and truth tables.

3. Sets and Venn Diagrams and their application to logic.

4. Analysis of arguments and critical thinking in real world situations.

5. Units and dimensional analysis and their applications.

6. General techniques for solving problems.



The student will be able to:



1. Recognize and analyze logical fallacies.

2. Define and identify logical propositions.

3. Construct and interpret truth tables

4. Solve problems in logic using truth tables.

5. Define sets and Venn diagrams.

6. Solve problems using sets and Venn diagrams.

7. Analyze and evaluate arguments using set theoretic and propositional 
methods. 

8. Apply the foregoing topics to everyday situations.

9. Define units and unitless quantities.

10.  Use logic to analyze and interpret units.

11.  Understand and apply dimensional analysis.

12.  Use logic to develop problem solving techniques.





Exercises from the text selected to reinforce and apply the above concepts 
to real-world situations should be completed. Applications include, but are 
not limited to, topics in the natural and social sciences. 



A project exploring the fallacies in politics is provided in the day to day 
syllabus. 



Specific applications which facilitate student goals include:



1. the gun control debate.

2. health care debate.

3. interpretation of measured gender differences.

4. Analyzing case studies using Venn diagrams.





Unit II:

 (10 hours) Numbers in the Real World (3A-3C)



1. Percentages and their correct use and interpretation.

2. Fractions and their relation to percentages.

3. Using percentages to describe change.

4. Using percentages to make comparisons.

5. Putting numbers in perspective.

6. Large and small numbers and their interpretation.

7. Uncertainties precision, accuracy and interpretation of error.

8. Applications to real world situations.



The student will be able to:



1. Relate numbers to real world situations.

2. Identify and use percentages and recognize their utility.

3. Decide when percentages are necessary and when they are not.

4. Analyze and evaluate real world situations using percentages.

5. Describe and recognize large and small numbers.

6. Use methods of Unit I to analyze and solve the logical problems related 
to largeness and smallness. 

7. Assess the efficacy of the techniques used to give meaning to large and 
small numbers. 

8. Define and describe uncertainty in both mathematical and real world 
situations. 

9. Examine errors in measurement in terms of precision and accuracy.

10.  Discuss ways of dealing with uncertainty in real world situations.

11.  Classify and examine the errors that give rise to uncertainty.





Exercises from the text selected to reinforce and apply the above concepts 
to real-world situations should be completed. Applications include, but are 
not limited to, finance, agriculture, and population growth. 



Specific applications which facilitate student goals include:



1. Salary Comparisons.

2. Of vs. More Than.

3. Shifting reference values and what they indicate.

4. Scientific notation 

5. Orders of magnitude.





Unit III:

 (12 hours) Growth Models (8A-8D)



1. Linear trends: a graphical approach.

2. What makes a line straight

3. Exponential growth and decay: a graphical approach.

4. Comparing and contrasting linear and exponential behavior.

5. Doubling time and half-life.

6. Some basic formulas and their connection to graphs of linear and 
exponential trends. 

7. Population growth in real situations.

8. Logarithmic growth: a graphical approach.

9. A common thread among earthquakes, sounds and acids.



The student will be able to:



1. Define, recognize and interpret linear growth from graphs and tables.

2. Define, recognize and interpret exponential growth from graphs and 
tables. 

3. Define, recognize and interpret logarithmic growth from graphs and 
tables. 

4. Distinguish, compare and contrast the three types of growth defined 
above. 

5. Define and identify exponential decay from graphs and tables.

6. Use doubling time and half-life to interpret and evaluate data.

7. Evaluate and assess various population growth models.

8. Summarize and discuss the exponential model used to understand 
radioactive decay. 

9. Summarize and discuss the logarithmic model used to understand the 
destructive power of earthquakes. 





Exercises from the text selected to reinforce and apply the above concepts 
to real-world situations should be completed. Applications include, but are 
not limited to topics such as population growth, radioactive decay, 
depreciation, and earthquakes. 



A project on earthquake disasters is included in the day to day syllabus.



Specific applications which facilitate student goals include:



1. Constant growth in college admissions.

2. Bacterial growth.

3. The problem of radioactive waste disposal.

4. Growth rates and carrying capacity.

5. Earthquake magnitudes.

6. Acid rain.

7. Weather patterns (which do not appear to fit any of these models).





Unit IV and Unit V can be combined and specific sections omitted or included 
at the discretion of the instructor. 



Unit IV:

 (5 hours) Geometric Models (10A-10B)  



1. Points, lines and planes.

2. Plane geometry.

3. Three-dimensional geometry.

4. Flatland and the existence of ghosts.

5. A brief discussion of spherical and hyperbolic geometry.

6. Applications.



The student will be able to:



1. Identify and distinguish Euclidean, Spherical and Hyperbolic geometries.

2. Understand the fundamental ideas of point line, angle and measurement in 
geometry. 

3. Develop and use formulas for area, perimeter and distance.

4. Define dimension and construct examples to illustrate its application to 
real world situations. 

5. Analyze and solve everyday problems using geometric methods.

6. Propose geometric models for optimal design of three dimensional forms.





Exercises from the text selected to reinforce and apply the above concepts 
to real-world situations should be completed. Applications include, but are 
not limited to topics in the natural and social sciences, the fine arts and 
architecture. 



Specific applications which facilitate student goals include:



1. Geometry in art and architecture.

2. Dimension and what it means.

3. Interior design.

4. Comparison of fundamental geometric quantities e.g. surface area and 
volume. 





Unit V

 (6 hours) Applications  (11A-11C 12A-12B)



1. Tones and scales, from a mathematical perspective.

2. Symmetry and its implications in art.

3. Proportion, ratio and esthetics.

4. Voting methods in various political systems.

5. Fairness of voting





The student will be able to:



1. Identify the mathematical underpinnings in music.

2. Interpret tone and scale mathematically.

3. Describe and recognize symmetry.

4. Evaluate the role that symmetry plays in art.

5. Relate proportion to symmetry.

6. Analyze and interpret the golden ratio from an esthetic viewpoint.

7. Define majority, plurality, democratic system.

8. Analyze election results and interpret them.

9. Define fairness in voting.

10. Compare and contrast the efficacy of various political systems.



Final project: An investigation and analysis of the life and work of George 
Polya. Details are provided in the day to day syllabus. 





















EVALUATION OF STUDENT PROGRESS:



The following suggested grading scheme may be modified, at the discretion of 
the instructor. 



Tests:



Unit I 10

Unit II10

Unit III10

Unit IV10

Unit V10



Collected Projects (2)10

Final Project10



In-class Quizzes, group work, etc.10



Final Exam20 





ACADEMIC INTEGRITY STATEMENT:



Under no circumstance should students knowingly represent the work of 
another as ones own. Students may not use any unauthorized assistance to 
complete assignments or exams, including but not limited to cheat-sheets, 
cell phones, text messaging and copying from another student. Violations 
should be reported to the Academic Integrity Committee and will be 
penalized. Please refer to pages 53-54 of the 2005-2006 Student Handbook. 





            LIBERAL ARTS DIVISION                               HY 101 - 
page 
