            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



1



                   Mercer County Community

College                                              Liberal

                        Arts Division

                              

                              

                       Course Outline







    MAT 146

Precalculus                                    4

Course Number                                   Course

Title                              Credits





             4



                                       15 weeks

Class or Lecture

Hours

                    Semester Length







Required Materials



Book:  Pre-calculus, a Graphing Approach

            by Barnett, Ziegler, and Byleen

            McGraw-Hill Publishers



Calculator:   Graphing  calculator  required  (TI-83  or  86

recommended,   no  calculator  with  algebraic  manipulation

permitted).





Catalog  Description:  A second course  in  the  mathematics

sequence  leading  to  calculus  for  engineering,  computer

science,  math,  and  science majors.   In  depth  study  of

polynomial,      rational,     exponential,     logarithmic,

trigonometric    and   inverse   trigonometric    functions,

equations,  and  identities systems of equations  including

matrices

extensive use of graphing calculators.





Latest Review:  Fall 2003



Prerequisites:  MAT 141 with a minimum C grade or

equivalent.  Credit will be given for only one of MAT 145 or

MAT 146.  Co-requisites:  None





Course Coordinator:  Edith Silver







                              

                              

                      Course Objectives



  1.   To develop the understanding that functions are

     statements of how a change in one quantity brings about a

     change in another quantity.

2.   To develop the skill and understanding of reading and

making graphs of functions.

3.   To develop the understanding that technology has

brought about changes in mathematics by the storing of data

from which models of events in our daily life can be

developed and from which predictions can be made.

4.   To develop the understanding that, given certain

conditions under which two or more quantities are related,

optimum solutions to problems can be obtained graphically

and algebraically.

5.   To develop the understanding that mathematics plays an

important role in various fields and the ability to transfer

mathematical algorithims and techniques from problems in one

field to that of another.

6.   To develop the skill of analyzing problems and

synthesizing information in another situation.

7.   To develop the skill of making quantitative estimations

that are appropriate for a given situation.

8.   To develop the ability to work with others on projects

and to contribute to the outcome of the project.

9.   To develop the mathematical and logical skills

necessary for a course in calculus.

10.  To develop quantitative and logical skills for everyday

living.

  

                              

                              

                              

                   Course Outline MAT 146



Unit I - Polynomial and Rational Functions (3.1 - 3.4)

2.5 weeks



            A.  You should be able to define, state, or

identify



          1.   relation

2.   function

3.   polynomial function and its degree

4.   domain

5.   range

6.   graph of an equation

7.   intercepts

8.   symmetry

9.   slope of a line

10.  distance formula

11.  midpoint formula

12.  vertical line test

13.  zeros, roots and solutions of a function

14.  even function

15.  odd function

16.  basic types of functions - linear, constant, identity,

square or quadratic, cubic, square root, reciprocal,

greatest integer and absolute value functions

17.  multiplicity m of zeros of a polynomial

18.  imaginary zeros

19.  upper and lower bounds on real zeros

20.  rational function

21.  discontinuity of a rational function

22.  vertical asymptotes

23.  horizontal asymptotes

24.  slant/oblique asymptotes



     B.   You should be able to



          1.   state and apply the Remainder Theorem, Factor Theorem,

            Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Rational Zeros Theorem,

            Imaginary Zeros Theorem, n Zeros Theorem, Upper and Lower

            Bound Rules for Real Zeros.

2.   perform algebraic long division and synthetic division

of polynomials

3.   evaluate a polynomial by using the remainder theorem

and synthetic division

4.   determine the left and right end behavior of a

polynomial using the degree and leading coefficient

          

          

          

          5.   sketch the graph of a polynomial or rational function

            and confirm the

                                 sketch   by   choosing   an

appropriate     viewing    window    on     the     graphing

                               calculator

          6.   find all real zeros of a polynomial or rational

            function and confirm the

                                zeros by using the root or

zero function on the graphing calculator

          7.   use the maximum and minimum functions on the graphing

            calculator to find the local extrema of a given polynomial

8.   describe the behavior of the graph of a polynomial at a

zero with an   odd or even multiplicity

9.   write an equation of a polynomial having given zeros

and a given degree

          10.  find, if possible, all the zeros and their multiplicity

            of a polynomial function with real coefficients and write

            the polynomial as  a product of linear and irreducible

            quadratic factors over the real numbers using the Rational

            Zeros Theorem and upper and lower bounds on the zeros

          11.  approximate irrational zeros for a polynomial using the

            bisection method for odd multiplicity zeros or a maximum or

            minimum approximation for even multiplicity zeros to two

            decimal places

12.  find the vertical, horizontal, and/or slant/oblique

asymptotes, if any, for a rational function

13.  solve applications that result in equations which are

polynomial or  rational functions

          14.  pass a unit test





Unit  II  -  Inverse Functions Exponential and  Logarithmic

Functions (4.1 - 4.7)  3.5weeks



             A.   You  should be able to define,  state,  or

identify



             1.   composite functions

          2.   inverse function and its notation

          3.   horizontal line test

4.   increasing function

5.   decreasing function

6.   one to one function

7.   implicit form of a function

8.   explicit form of a function

9.   exponential function with base b or e

10.  logarithmic function

11.  common logarithms

12.  natural logarithms

13.  change of base formula

14.  properties of logarithms









            B.  You should be able to



          1.   find  the  equation for the sum,  difference,

          product, or quotient of two

                given functions and determine the domain  of

          each

          2.   find the composite of two given functions and determine

            the domain of the composite

3.   determine the values of operations on functions or the

value of the composite function when given the graphs of two

functions and given an x value

          4.   find two functions, f and g, such that  for a given

            function h

          5    determine whether a given set of ordered pairs, given

            graph, or given equation is a one to one function

          6    find the inverse and its domain and range of a given

            one to one function and verify that two functions f(x) and

            g(x) are inverses of each other by showing f(g(x))  x and

            g(f(x))  x

          7.   graph a function and its inverse on the same axes and

            graph the line of symmetry yx

8.   graph a given exponential function or logarithmic

function, indicate its domain and range, x or y intercept,

describe it as increasing or decreasing and identify any

asymptotes the graph has

          9.   solve exponential equations in which it is possible to

            convert to the same base and equate exponents, for

            example:



                                    25 x1      125  2x



                                    (52) x1     (5 3) 2x



                                    5 2x2       5 6x



                                    2x2  6x



                                    2  4x



                                      x



          10.  perform vertical and horizontal shifts, stretches and

            compressions and reflections when given an exponential or

            logarithmic function together with its graph

11.  simplify and evaluate log expressions

12.  write log expressions in simpler form using the

properties of  logarithms

13.  write a given expression as a single log using the

properties of      logarithms

          14.  solve log equations using the properties of  logs, for

            example:



                                    3 log b 2  0.5 log b 25

- log b20  log b x



                                    log b      log b x



                                    log b 2  log b x



                                    x  2



          15.  use a calculator to evaluate expressions involving

            common and natural logs

16.  solve applications that result in exponential or log

equations such as    radioactive decay, bacterial growth,

compound interest, decibel        level, earthquake

intensity, etc.

17.  solve exponential equations by converting to log form

18.  solve log equations by converting to exponential form

19.  use the change of base formula to find the log of any

number in any base > 0 using base 10 or base e

20.  pass a unit test





Unit  III  - Trigonometric Functions (5.2 - 5.9) (omit  5.1)

4.5 weeks



             A.   You  should by able to define,  state,  or

identify



          1.   the unit circle

          2.   six circular functions sin x, cos x, tan x, csc x, sec

            x, cot x

3.   reciprocal trigonometric identities

4.   quotient identities tan x  (sin x)/(cos x) and cot x 

(cos x)/(sin x)

5.   identities for negatives such as sin(-x)  - sin x etc.

6.   Pythagorean identities

          

                      sin 2 x  cos 2 x  1

          

                                    1  tan 2 x  sec 2 x



                                    1  cot 2 x  csc 2 x



          7.   angles-straight, right, acute, obtuse, complementary,

            and supplementary

          8.   standard position of an angle

9.   initial and terminal sides of an angle

10.  coterminal angles

11.  positive and negative angles

12.  radian measure

13.  degree measure including minutes and seconds

          14.  quadrantal angles

          15.  relationships between radian and degree measure



                              

                              

          16.  six trigonometric functions  sin, cos, tan, csc,

            sec,cot

          17.  reference triangle and reference angle

18.  six trigonometric functions using sides of a right

triangle

19.  periodic function

20.  period of the six trigonometric graphs

21.  amplitude of sine and cosine graphs

22.  phase shift of a trigonometric graph

23.  inverse trigonometric functions

          24.  trigonometric functions of 00 or 0 radians, 300 or ,

            450 or , 600 or ,  900 or



            B.  You should be able to



          1.   define  the  six  circular  or  trigonometric

          functions  in terms of the unit        circle  in

          terms of a, b, and r or in terms of the sides  of

          a right       triangle

          2.   determine the signs of the trigonometric functions in

            any given quadrant

3.   convert from radian measure to degree measure and vice-

versa

          4.   use the formula   to find the radian measure for a

            central angle which subtends an arc s on a circle of radius

            r

          5.   convert from degrees, minutes, and seconds to

          decimal degrees and          vice-versa

          6.   find  a  positive  and a negative  coterminal

     angle for a given angle in

               degrees and radians

                         7.   find  the values  of  the  six

trigonometric     functions     for     an     angle      in

                             standard  position that  has  a

terminal    side    passing   through    a    given    point

                              (a,b) or when given the  value

of one of the trigonometric functions of

                             the angle

          8.   evaluate the six trigonometric functions for a given

            angle in degrees or radians using a graphing calculator

9.   find the reference angle for a given angle

          10.  find the acute angle   when given a trigonometric

            function value of  by using inverse trigonometric functions

11.  solve for the missing sides and angles of a right

triangle when given one other angle and a side or when given

two sides

          12.  sketch the graphs of equations of the form   y   A sin

            (Bx  C)  k or  y  A cos (Bx   C)  k, and determine the

            amplitude, period, phase shift and vertical shift, as well

            as the intercepts, domain and range

          13.  sketch the graphs of  y  A tan(BxC), y  A cot(BxC),

            y A csc(BxC), y A sec(BxC) and determine

            the period,    domain, range, and intercepts of

            each, as well as the phase shift

          14.  determine the restrictions needed to make   y  sin x,

            y  cos x and

            y    tan  x one to one functions so the inverse

            trigonometric  functions  can  be  defined,  and

            determine the domain and range for   y   sin  -

            1 x,

            y  cos -1 x, and y  tan -1 x

          15.  evaluate given inverse trigonometric expressions

16.  graph inverse trigonometric equations

17.  solve applications that result in trigonometric or

inverse trigonometric equations

18.  pass a unit test





      Unit IV  Trigonometric Identities and Conditional

Equations  (6.1 - 6.3, 6.5) omit 6.4            2.5 weeks.



             A.   You  should be able to define,  state,  or

identify



          1.   the basic trigonometric identities including the

            reciprocal, quotient, negatives, and Pythagorean identities

2.   the sum and difference identities



            sin (x  y)  sin x cos y  cos x sin y

            

            cos (x  y)  cos x cos y sin x sin y

            

            tan (x  y ) 

            

          3.   the cofunction identities that is, cofunctions of

            complementary angles  are equal

            cos ()  sin x

            sin ()  cos x

            tan ()  cot x

            

            

            

          4.    the double- and half-angle identities

            

               sin 2x  2 sin x cos x

            

               cos 2x  cos 2 x- sin 2 x  2 cos 2 x -1  1-

            2 sin 2 x

               tan 2x 



                      sin

               cos

               tan



          5.   conditional trigonometric equations and distinguish

            between trigonometric identities and conditional

            trigonometric equations



            B.  You should be able to



        1.   verify trigonometric identities by using definitions or

            previously    verified trigonometric identities such as the

            reciprocal, quotient, Pythagorean, sum and difference,

            cofunction, double- or half-angle identities

2.   use appropriate identities to find exact values of

trigonometric functions of given angles, for example:

            

            

        3.   solve  conditional trigonometric  equations  by

           using  identities to rewrite in terms of  one  or

           two  trigonometric  functions and  factoring,  or

           using   a   graphing  calculator  to   find   all

           solutions for

                         4.   solve applications that result

in trigonometric equations

                        5.  pass a unit test.











Unit V - Matrices (8.1 - 8.3)      2 weeks



             A.   You  should be able to define,  state,  or

identify



                        1.   system of 2 linear equations in

2 variables

          2.   solution of a system of equations

3.   points of intersection and graphing method of solution

4.   equivalent systems

5.   consistent systems

6.   inconsistent systems

7.   independent systems

8.   dependent systems

9.   substitution method of solution

10.  elimination by addition or subtraction method

11.  matrix

12.  order of a matrix   (m x n)

13.  square matrix

14.  column matrix

15.  row matrix

16.  entry of a matrix notation  (aij)

17.  augmented matrix

18.  coefficient matrix

19.  row equivalent matrices

20.  row operations

21.  reduced form

22.  reduced system

23.  Gauss - Jordan elimination method

24.  principal or main diagonal of a matrix



B.  You should be able to



                         1.    solve  a system of  2  linear

equations     in    2    variables    by    graphing     and

                                 finding   the   points   of

intersection,   if   any.   If  a   special   case   results

                               (same line or parallel lines)

you      should     be     able     to     identify      the

                                 system   as  dependent   or

inconsistent, respectively

          2.   solve a system by substitution which works best if at

            least one equation has one of the variables with a

            coefficient of   1

          3.   solve a system by addition or subtraction to eliminate

            one of the variables

4.   determine the dimensions of a matrix, rows x columns

5.   describe an entry in a matrix using aij notation

6.   write the augmented matrix for a system and use it to

solve the system

7.   classify a system as consistent and independent,

consistent and dependent, or inconsistent by looking at the

augmented matrix  solution

8.   perform indicated row operations on a given matrix

9.   put a matrix into reduced form by using row operations

10.  use back-substitution to solve linear systems in row-

echelon form

          11.  use the Gauss - Jordan elimination method on the

            augmented matrix to solve a given linear system

          12.  solve applications that result in linear systems of

            equations.



Evaluation and Grading



The tests, projects and exams will vary somewhat to allow

for individual creativity and professionalism of the

instructor.  A typical plan is five unit tests and a

comprehensive final exam.
