            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



COURSE OUTLINE







   MAT138                                                  Finite 
Mathematics 

Course Number                         Course Title





          3  3 lecture hours

CreditsHours





Catalog description: An overview of topics in finite mathematics with 
applications. Topics include systems of equations, matrices, linear 
programming, probability and statistics. 

Intended primarily for students in non-scientific / non-technical majors. 
Rutgers University accepts this course as equivalent to its course for 
liberal arts majors.3 lecture hours 





Prerequisite: MAT135 higher



Corequisite:  None





Required texts/other materials: 

1.  Tan, S.T., Finite Mathematics for the Managerial, Life, and Social 
Sciences, 8th ed., Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 2006. 

2. Scientific calculator







Last revised:  N/A 





Course coordinator:   Prof. Paul Toppo







Information resources: 



1. Instructors Solution Manual: This publication gives detailed solutions to

even-numbered exercises from the text.



2. Students Solution Manual: This publication gives detailed solutions to

odd-numbered exercises from the text.

Students are also highly encouraged to go to the Learning Center for 
additional information and/or tutoring. 



3.  The Mercer County Community College Library provides reference books 
that students may use. 



4.  Information contained in the web pages cited below may be of use:



a). http://www.zweigmedia.com/ThirdEdSite/tcfinitep.html

Stefan Waner and Steven R. Costenoble  On-Line Resources.



b). 
http://www.langara.bc.ca/mathstats/resource/onWeb/rawlist.htmFiniteDiscrete 

General resource link. Includes tutorials and practice exams.



c). http://mathforum.org/discrete/discrete.html

A Math forum sponsored by Drexel University. Includes exercises, internet 
projects and a discussion forum. 



d). http://myweb.cwpost.liu.edu/arockett/TextBook/FM-2nd.htm

This site provides access to the latest versions of the six Texas 
Instruments Graphing Calculator Programs and the nine Microsoft Excel 
worksheets for Finite Mathematics (2nd edition) by Geoffrey C. Berresford 
and Andrew M. Rockett 



e). http://infotrac.thomsonlearning.com/pdf/HSMathematics.pdf

Free database, resource center and mathematical writing tutorial offered by 
Thomson. 



Course Goals:



Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:



1. Understand and use to good effect the interplay between geometry and 
algebra in mathematics. 

2. Recognize and utilize the logical underpinnings in mathematics.

3. Acquire and develop a mathematical sense, or intuition.

4. Analyze, model and interpret real-world problems in mathematical terms.

5. Solve systems of linear equations, using algebraic and matrix methods.

6. Maximize and minimize functions subject to constraints, using geometrical 
and analytical methods. 

7. Understand and apply the theory of sets.

8. Use counting methods (permutations and combinations) to solve 
combinatorial problems. 

9. Use probabilistic and statistical methods to solve mathematical and 
real-world problems. 



Course-specific General Education goals and objectives 

 Critical thinking, problem solving and information literacy: 

Students will use critical thinking and problem solving skills in analyzing 
information gathered through different media and from a variety of sources. 

Through the study of equations, graphs and matrices of relations in data, 
the student will practice organizing and analyzing data in a way that can 
lead to valid conclusions. 

Internet Exercises are provided on the companion website to the text and 
require searching for data or other information on the web.  The authors of 
the text have provided a comprehensive list of web links and associated 
exercises to accompany each topic. 

 Communication: Students will communicate effectively in writing:

Explore and Discuss questions in the text take the concepts in each unit 
further and ask students to communicate with each other about how to answer 
the questions. 

Group participation fosters evaluation, revision and editing of solutions.

Written assignments in the course: 

- a project that includes an essay of at least 1100 words, 

- homework assignments which include short essay questions in addition to 
some application and exploration problems, 

- exam questions that require explanation and/or justification, in full 
sentences, of solutions. 





 Quantitative skills: Students will apply appropriate mathematical concepts 
and operations to interpret data and to solve problems. 



Students will demonstrate competence in the use of numerical, graphical, and 
algebraic representations. 



Students will demonstrate the ability to interpret data, analyze graphical 
information, and communicate solutions in written and oral form. 



Students will demonstrate proficiency in the use of mathematics and algebra 
to formulate and solve problems. 



 Science and technology: 

The main thrust of this and other mathematics courses is to take what is 
given and, by the use of the scientific method, to arrive at a valid 
conclusion. 

Students will demonstrate proficiency in using handheld calculators to 
support their use of mathematics. 





General Course Structure: 



The method of instruction is primarily lecture, but may include some 
collaborative in and out of class work, at the discretion of the instructor. 
The basic evaluation instrument will consist of four tests and a 
comprehensive final but may well include group assignments, short projects, 
and a final project, again, at the discretion of the instructor.  A 
suggested grading scheme appears at the end of the course outline.  A 
suggested day-to-day schedule based on a 45 hour semester course are 
available from the course coordinator. This includes a test bank and 
suggested exercises from the text as well as a set of short projects. 



The general course outline consists of five units:



Unit I:



 (12 hours) System of Equations and Matrices (2.1-2.7) 

A. Solving Systems of Linear Equations

B. Underdetermined and overdetermined systems

C. Solving Systems of Linear Equations using technology

D. Arithmetic of matrices 

E. Determinants 

F. Inverse matrices 

G. Row and column vectors 

F. The Leontief Input-Output Model



The student will be able to:



1. Solve systems of linear equations using algebraic techniques.

2. Learn and apply the arithmetic of matrices.

3. Use matrix mechanics to solve systems.

4. Predict the nature, and analyze and interpret the solutions of systems of 
linear equations. 

5. Decide whether a system is overdetermined or underdetermined.

6. Apply systems of equations to real-world problems.

7. Use determinants to find inverses of matrices. 

8. Apply the Leontief method of inputs and outputs to solve problems in 
economic. 



Exercises from the text selected to reinforce and apply the above concepts 
to real-world situations should be completed. Applications include, but are 
not limited to, topics in the natural and social sciences. 



A project exploring the Leontief economic model of inputs and outputs is 
provided in the day to day syllabus. 



Specific applications which facilitate student goals include:

 revenue from gasoline sales

 mixtures

 investments

 diet planning

 Inputs and outputs (Leontief Model)









Unit II:



 (10 hours) Linear Programming (3.1-3.3 and 4.1-4.2)

A. Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

B. The feasible region

C. Linear Programming Problems

D. The Simplex Method



The student will be able to:



      1.  Define and determine corner points and feasible regions.

2.  Graph feasible regions.

3.  Optimize functions over feasible regions.

4. Define and determine the simplex tableau.

5. Use the simplex method to maximize functions.

6. Use the simplex method to minimize functions.

7. Solve real-world applications.



Exercises from the text selected to reinforce and apply the above concepts 
to real-world situations should be completed. Applications include, but are 
not limited to, finance, agriculture, mining and advertising. 





Specific applications which facilitate student goals include:



 shipping schedules and costs

 crop planning 

 allocation of funds

 mining production







Unit III:



 (11 hours) Counting Techniques (Chapter 6)

A. Basic Set theory

B. Set operations

C. Venn Diagrams

D. Fundamental theorem of counting 

E. Permutations 

F. Combinations 

G. Applications 





The student will be able to:



1. Define sets, set operations, and the cardinality of a set.

2. Use set theory to solve mathematical and real-world problems.

3. Define and apply counting arguments.

4. Define and apply the multiplication principle.

5. Define permutation.

6. Define combination and distinguish it from a permutation.

7. Apply permutations and combinations to solve counting problems.





Exercises from the text selected to reinforce and apply the above concepts 
to real-world situations should be completed. Applications include, but are 
not limited to topics such as games of chance, management, voting and 
sports. 





Specific applications which facilitate student goals include:



 surveys

 combination locks

 investment options

 committee selection

 blood typing

 quality control



Unit IV:



 (12 hours) Probability and Statistics (Chapters 7 and 8)

A. Basic concepts 

B. Addition rule 

C. Multiplication rule 

D. Independent events 

E. Conditional probability 

F. Bayes theorem

G. Binomial probability 

H. Applications 

I. Samples and populations 

J. Organizing data 

K. Measures of central tendency 

L. Measures of dispersion 

M. Continuous random variables and the Normal Distribution 

N. The Normal approximation to the Binomial Distribution 





The student will be able to:



1. Define and analyze sample spaces and events in the context of set theory.

2. Define probability and enunciate the rules of probability.

3. Use counting techniques to solve problems in probability.

4. Define conditional probabilities.

5. Define independence of events.

6. Interpret conditional probabilities using probability trees.

7. Apply the ideas of events, independence and conditional probabilities     
to solve mathematical problems. 

8.  Learn and use Bayes Theorem.

9. Apply probabilistic techniques to real-world situations.

10.  Define and interpret distributions and random variables.

11.  Interpret data geometrically using a histogram.

12.  Determine and interpret the significance of the expected value of a 
random variable. 

13.  Define and interpret expected value.

14.  Discuss in more detail the significance of distributions.

15.  Define, interpret and analyze the binomial and normal distributions.

16.  Apply statistical methods to real-world situations.





Exercises from the text selected to reinforce and apply the above concepts 
to real-world situations should be completed. Applications include, but are 
not limited to topics in the natural and social sciences. 

 A project on the birthday problem is included in the day to day syllabus.



Specific applications which facilitate student goals include:



 investment analysis

 odds in games of chance

 sales, premiums and profits

 wage, age, grade and weight distributions



Evaluation Of Student Progress:



The following suggested grading scheme may be modified, at the discretion of 
the instructor. 



Tests:



Unit I 10

Units II and III 10

Unit IV10

Collected Projects (3)25



In-class Quizzes, group work, etc.15

Final Exam30 







Academic Integrity Statement:



Under no circumstance should students knowingly represent the work of 
another as ones own. Students may not use any unauthorized assistance to 
complete assignments or exams, including but not limited to cheat-sheets, 
cell phones, text messaging and copying from another student. Violations 
should be reported to the Academic Integrity Committee and will be 
penalized. Please refer to pages 53-54 of the 2005-2006 Student Handbook. 











            LIBERAL ARTS DIVISION                               HY 101 - 
page 
