            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.




COURSE OUTLINE







Course Number

MAT037A

Course Title

Beginning Algebra Part A

Credits

3










Hours: lecture/Lab/Other

3 lecture 



Co- or Pre-requisite

Passed MAT033 with a C

Or an appropriate score on Accuplacer test

Implementation sem/year

Fall 2008
Catalog description (2006-2009 Catalog): 

The first half of a two-semester sequence for students with minimal 
experience in algebra.  Topics include integers, algebraic expressions, 
solving and graphing linear equations and inequalities, systems of equations 
and polynomials.  Students must also complete MAT037B to take college-level 
math.   Foundation course does not fulfill mathematics elective requirement. 





Is course New, Revised, or Modified New



Required texts/other materials:



Textbook: Blitzer, Robert. Beginning Algebra. 5th Edition. Pearson 
Publishing, 2008. ISBN-10: 0-13-235679-1 

Or 

MyMathLab available in bookstore or at www.mymathlab.com.  An access code is 
required from an instructor and will be provided first day of class. 

Scientific calculator 

Notebook





Revision date:

Spring 2008  

Course coordinator:   

Betty Peterson, ext 3421, petersobmccc.edu





Information resources:

The library has an extensive collection of books that students may use for 
reinforcement of the skills being taught in this course. Supplemental 
materials are available from the publisher which includes students solution 
manual, a DVD series and MyMathLab.  MyMathLab is an online learning 
resource which includes an interactive textbook with guided solutions and a 
series of video lectures. 

Other learning resources:  

Tutors available at both campuses. 


Course Competencies/Goals:  

As this is a foundation level mathematics course, the course should first 
and foremost prepare the students for future college level work in 
mathematics.  The students should develop confidence in their abilities to 
perform successfully. They should also gain experiences that connect their 
classroom learning with real world applications of mathematics and should be 
able to build techniques of reasoning for effective problem solving. 



The student will be able to:

I. Apply knowledge of integers and their arithmetic operations.

II. Apply rules of arithmetic to algebraic expressions.

III. Solve equations and inequalities with one variable algebraically.

IV. Generate and interpret graphs of linear equations with two unknowns.

V. Demonstrate an understanding of mathematical vocabulary.

VI. Apply skills learned to solve application problems.

VII. Apply rules of exponents.

Course-specific General Education Knowledge Goals and Core Skills. 

General Education Knowledge Goal

Goal 2. Mathematics. Students will use appropriate mathematical and 
statistical concepts and operations to interpret data and to solve problems. 



MCCC Core Skills

Goal B. Critical Thinking and Problem-solving. Students will use critical 
thinking and problem solving skills in analyzing information. 

Goal F. Collaboration and Cooperation. Students will develop the 
interpersonal skills required for effective performance in group situations. 



Units of study in detail. 

Unit IIntegers and Expressions 

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to

 Solve applied problems involving the comparison of integers. (Course 
Competency I, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 

 Perform the mathematical operations of addition, subtraction, 
multiplication and division on integers. (Course Competency I, MCCC Core 
Skill 2) 

 Solve application problems involving integers. (Course Competencies I, V  
VI, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 

 Translate word phrases to algebraic expressions. (Course Competencies I  
VI, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 

 Evaluate algebraic expressions and formulas. (Course Competency II, MCCC 
Core Skills 2 and B) 

 Solve application problems involving formulas. (Course Competencies I, V  
VI, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 

 Combine like terms and simplify algebraic expressions that contain 
parentheses. (Course Competency II, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 















Unit IIEquations and Inequalities 

Learning Objectives

The student will be able to

 Use the properties of equality to solve equations. (Course Competencies I  
III, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 

 Solve a literal equation for one of the unknowns. (Course Competencies I  
III, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 

 Translate written statements into algebraic equations. (Course Competencies 
I, V  VI, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 

 Solve application problems involving equalities. (Course Competencies III, 
V  VI, MCCC Core Skills 2, B and F) 

 Solve and graph linear inequalities. (Course Competencies I  III, MCCC Core 
Skills 2 and B) 

 Graph linear compound inequalities. (Course Competencies I  III, MCCC Core 
Skills 2 and B) 

 Solve application problems involving inequalities. (Course Competencies I, 
III, V  VI, MCCC Core Skills 2, B and F) 





Unit III Graphs of Linear Equations and Systems 

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to

 Find ordered pairs that are solutions to linear equations and determine if 
they are correct. (Course Competency IV, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Graph linear equations of the form  and  by using a table of values. 
(Course Competency IV, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Find the slope of a line that passes through two given points. (Course 
Competency IV, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Graph a line that passes through a given point and has a given slope. 
(Course Competency IV, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Determine whether two given lines are parallel or perpendicular. (Course 
Competency IV, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Determine the x and y intercepts of linear equations. (Course Competency 
IV, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Solve application problems involving linear equations. (Course Competencies 
IV, V  VI, MCCC Core Skills 2, B and F) 

 Solve a system of two linear equations with two unknowns by graphing. 
(Course Competency IV, MCCC Core Skills 2 and B) 





Unit IVExponents and Polynomials 

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to

 Understand the vocabulary used to describe polynomials. (Course Competency 
V, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Apply knowledge of integers to add and subtract polynomials. (Course 
Competency II, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Use rules of exponents to multiply monomials. (Course Competency VII, MCCC 
Core Skill 2) 

 Apply rules to multiply polynomials when neither is a monomial. (Course 
Competencies II  VII, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

Evaluation of student learning:   





Grade will be based on the following percentages:

Four unit tests 60

Group Projects 10

Homework and Quizzes 10

Final 20



Multiple choice questions on the departmental unit tests will reflect each 
of the unit objectives listed above and administered in the testing center.  
No extra credit should be given on these tests.  Partial credit should not 
be given for work.  As an alternative to this policy, instructors may write 
their own free answer tests, but these tests need to be reviewed by the 
course coordinator before administration to ensure that both the learning 
objectives are being met and that the tests are clearly written to be fair 
for the students. 



The textbook chosen for this course has group projects at the end of each 
chapter.  During the review period for the unit, the students should 
complete a group project which will reinforce the material in the unit as 
well as connect it with a real world application.  A minimum of two projects 
should be collected for a grade. 



For the homework and quizzes portion of the grade instructors are free to do 
any or all of the following suggestions.  Homework could be checked for 
completion or collected and graded.  Quizzes should be given on a weekly 
basis when there are no tests assigned for completion. Most students need to 
practice the skills presented in class in order to perform well on a test.  
Attendance in class is important but is not enough and weekly graded 
opportunities should be used to ensure that the students are practicing on a 
regular basis.  Two other possibilities for a grade in this area would be to 
check notebooks to ensure that the students are taking notes during class or 
assigning minute papers to check for understanding of the days material. 

 

The final is comprehensive and passing the final is required to pass the 
class. 





Academic Integrity Statement:  



Mercer County Community College is committed to academic integrity  the 
honest, fair and continuing pursuit of knowledge, free from fraud or 
deception. 



Students should never:

o Knowingly represent the work of others as their own

o Knowingly represent previously completed academic work as current

o Fabricate data to support academic work

o Use or obtain unauthorized assistance in the execution of any academic 
work 

o Give fraudulent assistance to other students

o Unethically use technological means to gain academic advantages



Violators of the above actions will be penalized.  For a single violation 
the faculty member will determine the course of action.  This may include 
assigning a lower grade on the assignment, lowering the course grade, 
failing the student, or another penalty that is appropriate to the 
violation.  The student will be reported to the Academic Integrity 
Committee, who may impose other penalties for a second (or later) violation. 
 The student has right to a hearing and also to appeal any decisions.  These 
rights are outlined in the student handbook. 

            LIBERAL ARTS DIVISION                               HY 101 - 
page 
