            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.




COURSE OUTLINE







Course Number

MAT037B

Course Title

Beginning Algebra Part B

Credits

3










Hours: lecture/Lab/Other

3 lecture 



Co- or Pre-requisite

Passed MAT037A with at least a C



Implementation sem/year

Spring 2009
Catalog description (2006-2009 Catalog): 

The second half of a two-semester sequence for students with minimal 
experience in algebra. Topics include polynomials, exponents, factoring 
techniques, solving quadratic equations, rational expressions and square 
root expressions. Completion of MAT037A and MAT037B fulfills foundation 
requirement in algebra.  Foundation course does not fulfill mathematics 
elective requirement. 

 



Is course New, Revised, or Modified New



Required texts/other materials:



Textbook: Blitzer, Robert. Beginning Algebra. 5th Edition. Pearson 
Publishing, 2008. ISBN-10: 0-13-235679-1 

Or 

MyMathLab available in bookstore or at www.mymathlab.com.  An access code is 
required from an instructor and will be provided first day of class. 

Scientific calculator 

Notebook



Revision date:  

Spring 2008



Course coordinator:   

Betty Peterson, ext 3421, petersobmccc.edu







Information resources:

The library has an extensive collection of books that students may use for 
extra reinforcement of the skills being taught in this course.  Supplemental 
materials are available from the publisher which includes students solution 
manual, a DVD series and MyMathLab.  MyMathLab is an online learning 
resource which includes an interactive textbook with guided solutions and a 
series of video lectures. 



Other learning resources:  

Tutors available at both campuses. 

Course Competencies/Goals:  

As this is a foundation level mathematics course, the course should first 
and foremost prepare the students for future college level work in 
mathematics.  The students should develop confidence in their abilities to 
perform successfully. They should also gain experiences that connect their 
classroom learning with real world applications of mathematics and should be 
able to build techniques of reasoning for effective problem solving. 





The student will be able to:

I. Perform arithmetic operations on polynomials.

II. Distinguish polynomials to apply correct factoring techniques.

III. Perform arithmetic operations on rational expressions. 

IV. Apply correct techniques to simplify radicals.

V. Perform arithmetic operations on radical expressions.

VI. Develop skills in applying the language of mathematics to written 
English. 





Course-specific General Education Knowledge Goals and Core Skills. 

General Education Knowledge Goals

Goal 2. Mathematics. Students will use appropriate mathematical and 
statistical concepts and operations to interpret data and to solve problems. 



MCCC Core Skills

Goal B. Critical Thinking and Problem-solving. Students will use critical 
thinking and problem solving skills in analyzing information. 

Goal F. Collaboration and Cooperation. Students will develop the 
interpersonal skills required for effective performance in group situations. 







Units of study in detail. 



Unit IExponents and Polynomials 

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to

 Apply the special product rules to multiply polynomials.  (Course 
Competency I, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Evaluate polynomials (Course Competency I, MCCC Core Skill 2)

 Use the quotient rule of exponents to divide monomials. (Course Competency 
I, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Apply the zero power rule and quotients to power rule.  (Course Competency 
I, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Apply the negative exponent rule to scientific notation.  (Course 
Competency I, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Solve application problems involving polynomials and scientific notation. 
(Course Competencies I  VI, MCCC Core Skills 2, B, F) 













Unit II Factoring and Quadratic Equations

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to

 Identify the greatest common factor and use it to factor a polynomial. 
(Course Competency II, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Factor by grouping. (Course Competency II, MCCC Core Skill 2)

 Factor quadratic expressions, whenand when. (Course Competency II, MCCC 
Core Skill 2) 

 Factor trinomials of higher order by removing a GCF first then factoring 
the remaining quadratic factor. (Course Competency II, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Factor special products such as difference of two squares and perfect 
square trinomials. (Course Competency II, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Solve quadratic equations by factoring.  (Course Competency II, MCCC Core 
Skill 2) 





Unit III          Rational expressions 

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to

 Simplify rational expressions.  (Course Competency III, MCCC Core Skill 2)

 Perform arithmetic operations with rational expressions.  (Course 
Competency III, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Solve rational equations.  (Course Competency III, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Solve application problems involving rational expressions.  (Course 
Competencies III  VI, MCCC Core Skills 2, B, F) 



Unit IV          Radical expressions

Learning Objectives 

The student will be able to

 Simplify radicals.  (Course Competency IV, MCCC Core Skill 2)

 Simplify radicals that contain algebraic expressions.  (Course Competency 
IV, MCCC Core Skill 2) 

 Perform arithmetic operations with radicals.  (Course Competency V, MCCC 
Core Skill 2) 

 Solve application problems involving radicals.  (Course Competencies V  VI, 
MCCC Core Skills 2, B, F) 





Evaluation of student learning:   



Grade will be based on the following percentages:

Four unit tests 60

Group Projects 10

Homework and Quizzes 10

Final 20



Multiple choice questions on the departmental unit tests will reflect each 
of the unit objectives listed above and administered in the testing center.  
No extra credit should be given on these tests.  Partial credit should not 
be given for work.  As an alternative to this policy, instructors may write 
their own free answer tests, but these tests need to be reviewed by the 
course coordinator before administration to ensure that both the learning 
objectives are being met and that the tests are clearly written to be fair 
for the students. 



The textbook chosen for this course has group projects at the end of each 
chapter.  During the review period for the unit, the students should 
complete a group project which will reinforce the material in the unit as 
well as connect it with a real world application.  A minimum of two projects 
should be collected for a grade. 



For the homework and quizzes portion of the grade instructors are free to do 
any or all of the following suggestions.  Homework could be checked for 
completion or collected and graded.  Quizzes should be given on a weekly 
basis when there are no tests assigned for completion. Most students need to 
practice the skills presented in class in order to perform well on a test.  
Attendance in class is important but is not enough and weekly graded 
opportunities should be used to ensure that the students are practicing on a 
regular basis.  Two other possibilities for a grade in this area would be to 
check notebooks to ensure that the students are taking notes during class or 
assigning minute papers to check for understanding of the days material. 

 

The final is comprehensive and passing the final is required to pass the 
class. 





Academic Integrity Statement:  



Mercer County Community College is committed to academic integrity  the 
honest, fair and continuing pursuit of knowledge, free from fraud or 
deception. 

 Students should never:

o Knowingly represent the work of others as their own

o Knowingly represent previously completed academic work as current

o Fabricate data to support academic work

o Use or obtain unauthorized assistance in the execution of any academic 
work 

o Give fraudulent assistance to other students

o Unethically use technological means to gain academic advantages



Violators of the above actions will be penalized.  For a single violation 
the faculty member will determine the course of action.  This may include, 
assigning a lower grade on the assignment, lowering the course grade, 
failing the student, or another penalty that is appropriate to the 
violation.  The student will be reported to the Academic Integrity 
Committee, who may impose other penalties for a second (or later) violation. 
 The student has right to a hearing and also to appeal any decisions.  These 
rights are outlined in the student handbook. 







            LIBERAL ARTS DIVISION                               HY 101 - 
page 
