            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

COURSE OUTLINE





       MAT135Intermediate Algebra  Applications

Course Number                   Course Title





4                 4 lecture hours

       Credits                      Hours



Catalog description:



This course is designed for students who demonstrate some proficiency in 
algebra but who need to develop additional algebraic skills for use in other 
college courses or in higher level mathematics courses. Topics include 
function notation, absolute value function, quadratic equations, rational 
expressions and equations, rational exponents, radicals, graphing and 
inequalities. 





Prerequisites: 

Completion of  MAT034 with a grade of C or better, successful completion of 
a course equivalent to MAT034, an appropriate score on the Higher 
Mathematics Placement Test, or permission of the department chairperson. 



Corequisites:   None





Required Materials:

1.   Text:  Intermediate Algebra Through Applications, by Geoffrey Akst and 
Sadie 

                Bragg (Pearson/Addison Wesley Publishers)



2.   Calculator:  A scientific calculator is required.





Last revised:  November 2005





Course coordinators:   Yvonne A. Greenbaun

                                       Daniel Rose



Course goals:

Students will be able to demonstrate through tests, projects and 
quizzes/homework the ability to: 

1.  Solve inequalities in one and two variables

2.  Solve and graph both linear and quadratic equations

3.  Factor a second degree polynomial and some special higher degree 
polynomials 

4.  Recognize and work with functions and function notation

5.  Perform operations and solve equations involving polynomial, radical and 
rational expressions 

6.  Solve a system of two linear equations

7.  Apply each of the above techniques in various real world applications

8.  Construct and/or analyze both linear and quadratic models of real life 
phenomenon and predict 

     future data values from these models 

9.  Complete multiple projects containing investigative tasks which 
demonstrate the applications 

     of algebra in real world contexts



General Course Structure:



The content of the course is divided into three units with approximately the 
same amount of class time being devoted to each unit. The two primary 
assessments that will be used in these units are tests and projects, 
followed by a comprehensive final exam. 



Tests:  It is recommended that a test be given at the end of each unit. Each 
unit covers approximately 2 chapters of the text. A minimum of 3 tests must 
be given per semester. The Mathematics Department has placed sample unit 
tests on file in the Academic Testing Center which may be used at the 
discretion of the instructor. 



Projects:   Specific time has been set aside in this course for students to 
work together on projects focusing on real world applications of 
intermediate algebra. It is recommended that a minimum of 2 projects be 
incorporated into the course. Sample projects have been developed by the 
department and are available on CD  please see either of the course 
coordinators to pick one up. 



Final Exam:  A comprehensive final exam should be given at the end of the 
semester. The Mathematics Department has placed sample final exams in the 
Academic Testing Center which may be used at the discretion of the 
instructor. 



A suggested day-to-day schedule (based on a 30-class semester) which leaves 
in-class time for project work and a review of Chapter 1, as well as a list 
of minimum suggested homework exercises from the text are also available 
from the course coordinators. Please be sure to obtain a copy. Suggested 
grading policies are provided at the end of this outline. 













COURSE CONTENT





Unit I  Linear Modeling: Equations, Inequalities, and Graphs  (5 total 
weeks) 



Sections of text to be covered during the 5 weeks:



Chapter 2: Linear Equations and Inequalities (section 2.1, 2.3, 2.4 omit 
2.2, 2.5)  2.5 weeks 

Chapter 3: Graphs, Linear Equations  Inequalities, and Functions (section 
3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.6 

                  omit 3.5)  2.5 weeks. 



Student Goals  Chapter 2



1. Define and solve linear equations in one variable.

2. Determine if a given number is a solution to a given linear equation.

3. Define and solve linear inequalities in one variable.

4. Determine if a given number is a solution to a given linear inequality.

5. Graph solutions to linear inequalities on a real number line and express 
solutions in interval notation. 

6. Define, solve, and graph solutions to compound linear inequalities, as 
well as compound linear inequalities using and  or terminology. 



Real World Applications: Examples in the text which facilitate these goals 
through real world applications should be completed. Applications in the 
text pertain to subjects including, but not limited to business, nursing, 
geography, chemistry, economics, banking  accounting, physical fitness, 
investments, and profit. 



Specific text examples of linear modeling facilitating student goals 
include: 



 Calculating prescribed medical dosage

 Meeting marketing campaign budgets

 Allocating investments into bonds and mutual funds

 Comparing resulting salaries between two competing job offers

 Choosing cost efficient city parking plans

 Maintaining a physical fitness schedule





Student Goals  Chapter 3 



1. Plot points and identify quadrants on the coordinate plane.

2. Define independent (x-variable) and dependent (y-variable) axes.

3. Read, interpret, and explain trends in graphs which model applications.

4. Define, calculate and interpret slope, especially as a rate of change.

5. Determine relationship between slope and horizontal, vertical, parallel, 
and perpendicular lines. 

6. Define and graph linear equations in two variables. 

7. Identify and graph x- and y-intercepts of a graph, and interpret them in 
context. 

8. Express and graph linear equations in slope-intercept form.

9. Use linear modeling to find the equation of a line through two given 
points, or a slope and y-intercept. 

10. Define relations and functions.

11. Use function notation to evaluate outputs for given inputs.

12. Identify the domain and range of a function.

13. Graph simple functions apply vertical line test.



Real World Applications: Examples in the text which facilitate these goals 
through real world applications should be completed. Applications in the 
text pertain to subjects including, but not limited to temperature, 
population, stock appreciation/depreciation, chemistry, manufacturing, 
economics, nutrition, physics, business and sales. 



Specific text examples facilitating student goals include:



 Describing trends in U.S. population

 Describing various sociological trends from a given graph

 Analyzing recent trends in gasoline prices

 Comparing long-distance packages from two different providers

 Analyzing a proposed monthly payment plan for paying off bills

 Modeling the relationship between depth under water and pressure











Unit II  Polynomials, Rational Expressions and Equations  (5 total weeks)



Sections of text to be covered during the 5 weeks:



Chapter 5: Polynomials (section 5.1 through 5.7)  3 weeks

Chapter 6: Rational Expressions and Equations (section 6.1, 6.2, 6.4 omit 
6.3, 6.5)  2 weeks 



Student Goals  Chapter 5



1. Define monomial and polynomial (and its degree).

2. Add and subtract polynomials.

3. Multiply monomials and binomials (using FOIL) and special products 
(squares of binomials, etc.) 

4. Divide polynomials.

5. Factor the GCF from polynomials and expressions.

6. Factor polynomials by grouping.

7. Factor various trinomials.

8. Factor the difference of two squares, and the sum/difference of two 
cubes. 

9. Define and solve quadratic equations by the zero product property.



Real World Applications: Examples in the text which facilitate these goals 
through real world applications should be completed. Applications in the 
text pertain to subjects including, but not limited to imports/exports, 
profit, geometry, interest, average cost and profit, physics, projectile 
motion, finance. 









Specific text examples facilitating student goals include:



 Calculating the difference between the volumes of petroleum imported and 
exported in the U.S. 

 Using different cost models to compare the fixed costs and variable costs 
of owning and operating an automobile 

 Calculating average profit for different capital ventures

 Analyzing models of projectile motion to find when objects will hit ground 
level 

 Using quadratic equations to estimate the cost of a sailboats mainsail

 Estimating the average cost of a long-distance phone call per minute





Students Goals  Chapter 6



1. Define rational expressions and identify where theyre undefined.

2. Simplify rational expressions.

3. Add, subtract, multiply and divide rational expressions.

4. Solve rational equations.



Real World Applications: Examples in the text which facilitate these goals 
through real world applications should be completed. Applications in the 
text pertain to subjects including, but not limited to environmental 
pollution physics, sales growth, probability, average cost, distance/rate, 
sharing a job. 



Specific text examples facilitating student goals include:



 Examining cost models for removing the percent of pollutants from the air

 Simplifying and interpreting percent growth of sales models for a company

 Calculating the interest rate required to turn a principal investment into 
a specified amount in one year 







Unit III  Quadratic Equations, Functions Linear Systems Radical Expressions 
and Equations   (5 total weeks) 



Sections of text to be covered during the 5 weeks:  



Chapter  4: Solving Linear Systems (section 4.2 omit section 4.1, but 
checking solutions 

                   graphically are encouraged)  0.5 week  

Chapter  7: Radical Expressions Rational Exponents Complex Numbers (section 
7.1, 7.6 

                   omit operations of complex numbers and 7.2 through 7.5)  
1 week 

Chapter  8: Quadratic Equations and Functions (section 8.1, 8.2, 8.4 omit 
8.3, 8.5)  2 weeks 



Approximately the last week of the five weeks set aside for this unit can be 
spent finishing class projects and reviewing for the final exam.  It is 
recommended that sections from this unit be presented in the following 
chronological order in class: sections 7.6, 8.1, 8.2 and 8.4 (complex 
numbers and quadratic modeling) followed by 4.2 and 7.1 (linear systems with 
solutions and radical expressions).   See the day-to-day schedule for the 
chronological order of sections. 

Students Goals  Chapter 7.6, 8.1, 8.2, and 8.4



1. Define the imaginary number i and complex number  

2. Define and solve quadratic equations by completing the square and/or the 
quadratic formula to get both real and complex solutions. 

3. Use the discriminant to find the number of real and complex solutions to 
a quadratic equation. 

4. Graph quadratic equations, identifying the vertex as well as the 
maximum/minimum value attained by the function. 

5. Identify the domain and range of a quadratic function.





Real World Applications: Examples in the text which facilitate these goals 
through real world applications should be completed. Applications in the 
text pertain to subjects including, but not limited to environmental 
pollution, sociology, electrical engineering, finance and projectile motion. 



Specific text examples facilitating student goals include:



 Analyzing quadratic models for the number of U.S. cell phone subscribers 
and use these models to predict future data 

 Analyzing quadratic models for the value of the SP 500 Index and use these 
models to predict future data 

 Using quadratic profit models to predict the number of units of a product 
that mist be sold to reach a specified amount of monetary return. 

 Using cost models for a business to minimize the daily cost in 
manufacturing units 



Student Goals  Chapter 4.2 and 7.1



1. Solve linear systems of equations having solutions

2. Define and calculate square, cube, and nth root of a number.

3. Calculate and/or simplify expressions with radicals or rational 
exponents. 





Real World Applications: Examples in the text which facilitate these goals 
through real world applications should be completed. Applications in the 
text pertain to subjects including, but not limited to astronomy, geography, 
physics, and landscaping. 



Specific text examples facilitating student goals include:



 Analyzing magazine sales to address economic considerations of future 
marketing endeavors. 

 Calculating the velocity of a free-falling object after it falls a given 
distance 















Evaluation of student learning:



Students should receive regular feedback on their work through tests, 
projects, and quizzes/homework.  The syllabus for this course should 
describe the schedule for classes and assessments. A suggested day-to-day 
schedule (based on a 30-class semester) which leaves in-class time for 
project work and a review of Chapter 1, as well as a list of minimum 
suggested homework exercises from the text are also available from the 
course coordinators. 



A minimum of 3 tests and 2 projects must be given per semester, as well as a 
comprehensive final exam. Sample unit tests and final exams have been 
developed by the department and are available in the Academic Testing 
Center. Sample projects have been developed by the department and are 
available on CD  please see either of the course coordinators to pick one 
up. Suggested grading schemes for the course are provided below, although 
the individual instructor can modify them, provided that the minimum 
requirements above are met. 





Unit Tests (3)...40Unit Tests (3).35

Collected Projects (2)..20Collected Projects (3)30

In-class Quizzes, etc15In-Class Quizzes, etc.10

Final Exam..25Final Exam.25



(65 tests/final)(60 tests/final)

(35 projects, quizzes)(40 projects, quizzes)



Academic Integrity Statement:



Under no circumstance should students knowingly represent the work of 
another as ones own.  Students may not use any unauthorized assistance to 
complete assignments or exams, including but not limited to cheat-sheets, 
cell phones, text messaging and copying from another student.  Violations 
should be reported to the Academic Integrity Committee and will be 
penalized.  Please refer to pages 55-56 of the 2003-2004 Student Handbook. 



Additional Information and Tutorial Resources



The following are additional resources that the publishers of the text have 
made available for instructors and students. Please stop by the Division 
office or see either of the course coordinators if you are an instructor and 
need any of these resources, or if you have any questions. 



1. Instructors Solution Manual:  This publication gives detailed solutions 
to 

even-numbered exercises from the text.



2. Students Solution Manual:  This publication gives detailed solutions to

odd-numbered exercises from the text.



3. MyMathLab:  A complete online course designed to parallel the text with 
links to video clips and practice exercises that are linked to the text. 



In addition, a search of the Mercer County Community College Library shows 
that there are close to 100 reference books that students may use and a 
collection of problems on CD. Students are also encouraged to utilize the 
Learning Centers for additional resources and/or tutoring. 
