            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

1.

Course Number and Title:

CSIT182Cisco Networking Fundamentals II

2.

Semester Hours:

3 s.h.

Contact Hours: 

( 1

Lecture



3 )

Lab



3.

Catalog Description:

This course, the second in a six credit sequence, fulfills the Cisco 
Networking Academy Program semester 3 and 4 requirement. Instruction 
includes, but is not limited to, networking, network terminology and 
protocols, network standards, LANs, WANs, OSI models, cabling, cabling 
tools, routers, router programming, network physical and logical topologies, 
and IP addressing. Emphasis is given to the use of decision-making and 
problem-solving techniques in applied science, mathematics and 
communications in the solution of networking problems. From the instruction 
the student learns the principles and practices of networking technology and 
completes From the instruction the student learns the principles and 
practices of networking technology and completes the second half of the 
Cisco Academy training to be eligible to take the Cisco Certified Network 
Associate (CCNA) exam. 

This is an intensive curriculum where student Web access and self-discipline 
is mandatory in order to adequately prepare for each in class session. This 
is a demanding course and only motivated students should enroll. All testing 
and lab assignments will be completed in the classroom/lab setting. 

4.

Prerequisites:

CSIT181

5.

Maximum Class Size:

18

Lab Fee Code:

F

6.

Justification:





A. General Education goal(s) this course addresses.

The student will gain state of the art knowledge and skills required to 
compete in todays business community and will have a foundation to continue 
to grow in the fast evolving online information technology fields. 



B. List the diversity requirements met by this course.

Not Applicable.





7.Course Objectives:

A. The student will be able to list the required IPX(tm) address and 
encapsulation type. 

B. The student will be able to configure IPX access lists and SAP filters to 
control basic Novell traffic. 

C. The student will be able to enable the Novell IPX protocol and configure 
interfaces. 

D. The student will be able to monitor Novell IPX operation on the router.

E. The student will be able to describe LAN segmentation using bridges, 
routers and switches. 

F. The student will be able to name and describe two switching methods.

G. The student will be able to describe full and half-duplex Ethernet 
operation. 

H. The student will be able to describe network congestion problems in 
Ethernet networks. 

I. The student will be able to describe the benefits of network segmentation 
with bridges, routers and switches. 

J. The student will be able to describe the features, benefits, guidelines 
and distance limitations of Fast Ethernet. 

K. The student will be able to distinguish between cut-through and 
store-and-forward LAN switching. 

L. The student will be able to describe the operation of the Spanning Tree 
Protocol and its benefits. 

M. The student will be able to describe the benefits of virtual LANs.

N. The student will be able to differentiate between the following WAN 
services: LAPB, Frame Relay, ISDN/LAPD, HDLC, PPP, and DDR. 

O. The student will be able to recognize key Frame Relay terms and features.

P. The student will be able to list commands to configure Frame Relay LMIs, 
maps, and subinterfaces. 

Q. The student will be able to list commands to monitor Frame Relay 
operation in the router. 

R. The student will be able state a relevant use and context for ISDN 
networking. 

S. The student will be able to identify ISDN protocols, function groups, 
reference points, and channels. 

T. The student will be able to describe Ciscos implementation of ISDN BRI.

8.Methods of Instruction:

Class lecture/discussion, demonstrations, lab assignments, web-based 
curriculum delivery, testing, assessment, evaluation and reporting.  This 
course requires students to use the web-based modules to prepare for all 
class sessions. 

9.Instructional Materials:

Cisco Networking Academy Program: Second-Year Companion Guide

By Vito Amato

Cisco Press, 2000



Cisco Networking Academy Program: Engineering Journal and Workbook, Volume 2

Cisco Press, 2000



Cisco online curriculum





10.Tentative Topical Outline:

A. Cisco Networking Academy Semester 3 Curriculum



1. Introduction

a. Review OSI Reference Model

b. Review Router Operations

c. Review Routing Protocols



2. LAN Switching

a. Network Demands

b. Improving LAN Performance

c. Switching and Bridging Overview

d. Spanning-Tree Protocol



3. VLANs

a. VLAN Overview

b. Segmenting with Switching Architectures

c. VLAN Implementations

d. Benefits of VLANs



4. LAN Design

a. LAN Design Goals

b. Network Design Components

c. Network Design Methodology

d. Case Study - LAN Design



5. Routing Protocols: IGRP

a. Network-Layer Basics

b. Routed Versus Routing Protocols

c. IP Routing Protocols

d. IP Routing Configuration

e. Understanding IGRP Operation

f. Case Study - Routing Protocols and Configuring IGRP

6. 

ACLs

a. ACL Overview

b. ACL Configuration Tasks

c. Standard ACLs

d. Extended ACLs

e. Using Named ACLs

f. Using ACLs with Protocols

g. Using ACLs with Firewalls

h. Case Study - Using ACLs



7. Novell IPX

a. Cisco Routers in NetWare Networks

b. IPX Overview

c. Novell Encapsulations

d. Novell Routing Using RIP

e. Service Advertising Protocol

f. Novell IPX Configuration Tasks

g. Monitoring and Managing an IPX Network

h. Case Study - Configuring Novell



8. Network Management and Semester 3 Test Review





B. 

Cisco Networking Academy Program Semester 4 Curriculum



1. WANs

a. WAN Technology Overview

b. WAN Devices

c. WANs and the OSI Reference Model

d. WAN Frame Encapsulation Formats

e. WAN Link Options

f. Case Study - WANs



2. WAN Design

a. WAN Communication

b. WAN Design Considerations

c. Identifying and Selecting Networking Capabilities

d. Case Study - WAN Design



3. PPP

a. PPP Overview

b. PPP Session Establishment

c. PPP Authentication

d. Case Study - PPP



4. ISDN

a. ISDN Overview

b. ISDN and the OSI Reference Model

c. ISDN Encapsulation

d. ISDN Uses

e. ISDN Services: BRI and PRI

f. ISDN Configuration Tasks

g. Dial-on-Demand Routing

h. Case Study - ISDN



5. Frame Relay

a. Frame Relay Technology Overview

b. Ciscos Implementation of Frame Relay: LMI

c. Global Addressing

d. Frame Relay Subinterfaces

e. Configuring Basic Frame Relay

f. Case Study - Frame Relay



6. Network Management and Semester 4 Test Review





11.Grading and Evaluation:

A. Chapter Quizzes

Eight Quizzes for Semester 3

Nine Quizzes for Semester 4

B. Semester 3 Final Exam

C. Lab Evaluation of Topics Covered in Semester 3 and 4: trouble shooting 
techniques 

D. Semester 4 Final Exam

E. White Paper, which deals with the approach to designing a network







Reviewed:   Mary A Burke06/2001

CSIT182



1 of 1
