            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

1.

Course Number and Title:

CSIT181Cisco Networking Fundamentals I

2.

Semester Hours:

3 s.h.

Contact Hours: 

( 1

Lecture



3 )

Lab



3.

Catalog Description:

This course, the first in a six credit sequence, fulfills the Cisco 
Networking Academy Program semester 1 and 2 requirement. Instruction 
includes, but is not limited to, networking, network terminology and 
protocols, network standards, LANs, WANs, OSI models, cabling, cabling 
tools, routers, router programming, network physical and logical topologies, 
and IP addressing. Emphasis is given to the use of decision-making and 
problem-solving techniques in applied science, mathematics and 
communications in the solution of networking problems. From the instruction 
the student learns the principles and practices of networking technology and 
completes the first half of the Cisco Academy training to be eligible to 
take the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) exam. 

This is an intensive curriculum where student Web access and self-discipline 
is mandatory in order to adequately prepare for each in class session. This 
is a demanding course and only motivated students should enroll. All testing 
and lab assignments will be completed in the classroom/lab setting. 

4.

Prerequisites/zCorequisites:

None

5.

Maximum Class Size:

18

Lab Fee Code:

F

6.

Justification:





A. General Education goal(s) this course addresses.

The student will gain state of the art knowledge and skills required to 
compete in todays business community and will have a foundation to continue 
to grow in the fast evolving online information technology fields. 



B. List the diversity requirements met by this course.

Not Applicable.

7.Course Objectives:

A. The student will be able to define common networking terms.

B. The student will be able to define and describe network standards.

C. The student will be able to identify the functions of each of the seven 
layers of the OSI reference model. 

D. The student will be able to identify the types of networking media used 
at the physical layer. 

E. The student will be able to describe the process of encapsulation and 
communication between layers. 

F. The student will be able to identify and describe networking devices used 
to filter traffic and reduce collision domains. 

G. The student will be able to describe the LAN and Wan technologies, 
standards and networking devices that operate at the physical, data link, 
and network layers of the OSI reference model. 

H. The student will be able to work with IP addressing and identify classes, 
subnets, subnet masks and hosts. 

I. The student will be able to describe ARP and RARP with respect to MAC and 
IP addresses. 

J. The student will be able to describe and identify the advantages and 
disadvantages of bus, star and extended star topologies. 

K. The student will be able to identify and describe structured cabling and 
electrical specifications together with the wiring and electrical techniques 
used in building networks. 

L. The student will be able to describe the Application, Presentation, 
Session and Transport Layers. 

M. The student will be able to describe the function and processes used at 
the transport layer to provide reliable delivery of data as well as 
effective control of traffic flow. 

N. The student will be able to describe TCP/IP and its operation to ensure 
communications across a set of interconnected networks. 

O. The student will be able to describe the routers use and operation in the 
OSI reference model network layer. 

P. The student will be able to perform basic network administration 
procedures and functions necessary to ensure efficient and effective 
delivery of data on a network with routers. 

Q. The student will be able to load, maintain and maintain Cisco 
Internetwork Operating System (IOS). 

R. The student will be able to describe the process of configuring IP 
addresses. 

S. The student will be able to describe the initial router configuration 
mode, the IP routing table and routing protocols. 

T. The student will be able to identify the techniques and tools necessary 
to manage a network. 



8.Methods of Instruction:

Class lecture/discussion, demonstrations, lab assignments, web-based 
curriculum delivery, testing, assessment, evaluation and reporting.  This 
course requires students to use the web-based modules to prepare for all 
class sessions. 

9.Instructional Materials:

Cisco Networking Academy Program: First-Year Companion Guide

By Vito Amato

Cisco Press, 2000



Cisco Networking Academy Program: Engineering Journal and Workbook, Volume I

Cisco Press, 2000



Cisco online curriculum



10.Tentative Topical Outline:

A. Cisco Networking Academy Semester 1 Curriculum



1. Computing Basics

a. Hardware

b. Software

c. Binary Number System

d. Basic Networking Terminology

e. Digital Bandwidths



2. The OSI Model

a. General Model of Communication

b. The OSI Reference Model

c. Comparison of the OSI Model and the TCP/IP Model

d. Processes, People, Policies



3. Local Area Networks

a. Basic LAN Devices

b. Evolution of Network Devices

c. Basics of Data Flow Through LANs

d. Basics of Data Flow Through LANs



4. Electronics and Signals

a. Basics of Electricity

b. Basics of Digital Multimeters

c. Basics of Signals and Noise in Communications Systems

d. Basics of Encoding Networking Signals



5. Layer 1 - Media, Connections and Collisions

a. Most Common LAN Media

b. Cable Specification and Termination

c. Making and Testing Cable

d. Layer 1 Components and Devices

e. Collisions and Collision Domains in Shared Layer Environments

f. Basic Topologies Used in Networking



6. Layer 2 - Concepts

a. LAN Standards

b. Hexadecimal Numbers

c. MAC Addressing

d. Framing

e. Media Access Control (MAC)



7. Layer 2 - Technologies

a. Basics of Token Ring

b. Basics of Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI)

c. Ethernet and IEEE 802.3

d. Layer 2 Devices

e. Effects of Layer 2 Devices on Data Flow

f. Basic Ethernet 10Base-T Troubleshooting



8. Design and Documentation

a. Basic Network Design and Documentation

b. Planning Structured Cabling: Wiring Closet Specifications

c. Planning Structured Cabling: Identifying Potential Wiring Closets

d. Planning Structured Cabling: Selection Practice

e. Planning Structured Cabling: Horizontal and Backbone Cabling

f. Design Practice No. 1: Wiring Plan for Ethernet Star Topology LAN

g. Design Practice No. 2: Multiple Earth Ground Problems

h. Network Power Supply Issues: Power Line Problems

i. Network Power Supply Issues: Surge Suppressors and Uninterruptible Power 
Supply (UPS) Functions 



9. Structured Cabling Project

a. Project Planning

b. RJ-45 Jack and Outlet Installation

c. Basics of Cable Installation

d. Structured Cable Run Installation

e. Basics of Wiring Closets and Patch Panels

f. Range of Equipment for Testing Structured Cabling Projects



10. 

Layer 3: Routing and Addressing

a. Importance of a Network Layer

b. Path Determination

c. IP Address within the IP Header

d. IP Address Classes

e. Reserved Address Space

f. Basics of Subnetting

g. Creating a Subnet



11. Layer 3 Routing Protocols

a. Layer 3 Devices

b. Network-to-Network Communications

c. Advanced ARP Concepts

d. Routable Protocols

e. Routing Protocols

f. Other Network Layer Services

g. ARP Tables

h. Interior Gateway Protocols (IGP) and Exterior Gateway Protocol (EGP)

i. Protocol Analyzer Software



12. Layer 4: The Transport Layer

a. TCP and UDP

b. TCP Connection Methods



13. Layer 5: Session Layer



14. Layer 6: The Presentation Layer



15. Layer 7: The Application Layer

a. Basics of the Application Layer

b. Domain Name System

c. Network Applications

d. Application Layer Examples



B. 

Cisco Networking Academy Program Semester 2 Curriculum



1. Routers

a. Application Layer Examples

b. WANs and Routers



2. Using the Router

a. Router User Interface

b. Using The Router Interface and Interface Modes



3. Router Components

a. Router Components

b. Router Show Commands

c. Routers Network Neighbors

d. Basic Networking Testing

e. Challenge Lab



4. Router Startup and Setup

a. Router Boot Sequence and Setup Mode

b. System Configuration Dialog

c. Challenge Lab



5. Router Configuration

a. Router Configuration Files

b. Router Configuration Modes

c. Configuration methods

d. Challenge Labs



6. IOS

a. The Basics of IOS Versions

b. Bootstrap Options in Software

c. IOS Naming and Software Image Backup



7. Individual Router Configuration Practice

a. Configuring a Router from the CLI after Start-up Config has been Erased

b. Router Configuration Lab



8. TCP/IP

a. Router Configuration Lab

b. 2 Layer 3 Concepts



9. IP Addressing

a. IP addressing and subletting

b. The Role of DNS in Router Configurations

c. Verifying Address Configuration

d. Assigning New Subnet Numbers to the Topology

10. Routing

a. Routing Basics

b. Why Routing Protocols are Necessary

c. Distance-Vector Routing

d. Link-State Routing

e. The Context of Different Routing Protocols



11. Routing Protocols

a. Initial Router Configuration

b. Interior and Exterior Routing Protocols

c. RIP

d. IGRP

e. Challenge Labs



12. Network Management

a. Audits

b. Management Tools

c. Troubleshooting

11.Grading and Evaluation:

A. Chapter Quizzes

Thirteen Quizzes for Semester 1

Eight Quizzes for Semester 2

B. Semester 1 Final Exam

C. Lab Evaluation of Topics Covered in Semesters 1 and 2

D. Semester 2 Final Exam







Reviewed:   Mary A Burke06/2001

CSIT181



1 of 1
