COURSE  SYLLABUS

1. Course Number and Title: CSIT120   Internet Essentials/HTML

2. Semester Hours:3 s.h.  Contact Hours: ( 3         0 )

                                         Lecture     Lab



3. Catalog Description:

This course will provide an introduction to the Internet and World Wide Web 
(WWW) for the novice. The course will 

cover getting on the Internet and using the Internet as a research tool 
including search engines, databases and 

correct citations. The course also introduces HTML and the creation of web 
sites.  Open lab time required. 



4. Prerequisites: Working knowledge of Microsoft Windows

   Co-requisites: None



5. Maximum Class Size:22  Course Fee Code: 2 Differential Funding Category:B



6. Justification:

A. List the general education goal (s) this course addresses.

1. To develop the ability to communicate effectively through reading, 
listening, speaking and writing. (2) 

2. To develop the ability to solve problems by collecting, organizing and 
evaluating information. (3) 

3. To develop an understanding of technology and its impact on society and 
the environment. (12) 

4. To foster the curiosity, creativity and desire to become autonomous 
learners for life. (13) 



B. List the diversity requirements met by this course.

Not Applicable.



7. Course Objectives:

The student will be able to

A. Evaluate Internet Service Providers (ISP) in terms of cost and features.

B. Compare and contrast the characteristics of dial-up connections, DSL and 
cable modems. 

C. Send and manage e-mail.

D. Attach a file to an email message.

E. Locate and join appropriate listservs.

F. Locate and participate in relevant newsgroups.

G. Appreciate the features and limitations of the major web browsers.

H. Describe the impact of multimedia on web site performance and loading 
time. 

I. Interpret Uniform Resource Locator (URL) addresses.

J. Understand the relationship between URLs, hyperlinks and bookmarks.

K. Choose an appropriate search engine based on the nature of the query.

L. Describe the difference between a search engine and a database accessed 
from the Internet. 

M. Download files through a web browser using the File Transfer Protocol 
(FTP) protocol. 

N. Be aware of the potential hazard from computer viruses and the tools 
available to reduce this threat. 

O. Understand the security risks inherent in accessing the Internet.

P. Be aware of the privacy issues associated with the Internet.

Q. Design and construct a web page using Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) 
and an HTML editor. 

R. Place a table in a web page.

S. Place a list in a web page using appropriate HTML list tags.

T. Describe the uses and placement of Meta tags.

U. Appreciate the importance of designing web sites for the user.

V. Appreciate the importance of planning for site maintenance and expansion.

W. Be aware of the requirements for establishing a web page on the Internet.



8. Methods of Instruction:

Class lecture, discussion, demonstrations, lab assignments, online 
presentations and final website project. 



9. Instructional Materials:

Class notes, textbooks, presentations, software and online materials.



10.Tentative Topical Outline:

A) Introduction:  What is the Internet

B) Connecting to the Internet

1) What you need

a) Dial-up

b) Cable modem

c) DSL

2) Choosing an Internet Provider

C) Email

1) Addressing email

2) Locating addresses

3) Replying to individuals and groups

4) Sending attachments

5) Email viruses

D) Listservs and Newsgroups

1) Subscribing to a list

a) Managing list messages

b) Sending messages to the list

c) Ending a list subscription

2) Locating newsgroups

3) Joining newsgroups

a) Managing messages from newsgroups

b) Posting messages to the group

c) Ending participation in the group

E) The World Wide Web

1) Browsers

2) URL addressing conventions

3) Hyperlinks

4) Bookmarks

5) Multimedia and saving time

6) Saving pages

7) Exploring Web Pages

F) Finding Information:  Search Engines

1) Search strategies

2) Google

3) Alta Vista

4) Subject and language specific search engines

5) Internet databases

G) FTP

1) Downloading/uploading files and programs

2) Virus issues

H) Security and privacy

1) Protecting yourself and your computer

2) Responsibilities of an Internet user

I) Designing a Web site

1) HTML basics

a) Basic page.

b) Tags

c) Tables

d) Lists

e) Meta tags

2) Using an HTML editor (HomeSite)

3) Design considerations for usability

4) Planning

5) Getting your site on the Internet

6) Announcing your site

 

11. Grade Determinants:

The final grade in the course will be the cumulative grade based on the 
following letter grades for the course assignments and examinations: 



AExcellentDBelow Average

BVery GoodFFailure

BGoodPPassing

CAbove AverageI Incomplete

CAverageRAudit



12.Number of Papers and Exams:

A minimum of 8 minor projects, labs, and/or self assessment (homework) 
assignments, a web site project, a minimum of 3 exams and/or skills 
assessment. 



Revised   Barry KolbSummer 2005
