            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Ocean County College

Course syllabus



1.Course Number and Title:M261 - Precalculus Techniques and Applications



2.Semester Hours:4Contact Hours:(4       0)

LecLab

3.Catalog Description:



This course is specifically designed as an accelerated review of algebraic, 
geometric, and trigonometric topics that will enable the highly motivated 
student to begin calculus immediately upon completion.  Critical thinking 
skills will be developed through the study of polynomial, rational, 
trigonometric, logarithmic, and exponential functions and their graphs from 
an algebraic, analytic, and geometric perspectives.  Other topics to be 
studied are systems of equations and inequalities, matrices and 
determinants, sequences and series, and mathematical induction.  Technology 
and mathematical modeling will be utilized throughout the course.  Note:  
Students who complete M164 or M167 with a grade of B or higher should not 
need M261 prior to enrolling in M265. 



4.Prerequisites:Algebra Placement level of no remediation and a minimum of 
three (3) years of high school algebra (including trigonometry) with a grade 
of B or higher. 



5.Maximum Class Size:35

Lab Fee:0

Differential Funding Category:1



6.Justification:

a.This course strengthens the necessary foundation for courses required in 
the study of Computer Science, Engineering, Science, and Mathematics.  It 
provides the student with the critical thinking ability needed for future 
success as well as an understanding of the concepts. 



b.Some of the topics covered in this course are already covered in the 
prerequisite course at a skill manipulations level.  However, in this course 
these topics will be explored in greater depth and application, enabling the 
students to expand their knowledge and understanding of the material. 



c.With the advent of technology, students need to be aware of the power of, 
and gain experience in the use of, computer software and graphing 
calculators.  Using these technologies enhances the topics presented and 
fosters a better understanding of the material. 



d.This course supports the mission of the college by providing students an 
accelerated method of attaining the mastery of the mathematical skills and 
concepts which will enable the student to reach their goal of transfer to 
the baccalaureate institution. 



e.This Precalculus course compares to courses worth 4 credits with the same 
title offered by at least ten (10) New Jersey colleges or universities (for 
example Rutgers, NJIT, Monmouth, Rider, and Richard Stockton).  Currently, 
these institutions do not accept our 3 credit Precalculus course since their 
Precalculus course is 4 credits. 



7.Course Objectives:

a.To study functions, their graphs, transformations, and inverses.  

b.To model functions from applications.

c.To analyze polynomial and rational functions and their graphs.

d.To study the complex number system.

e.To study exponential and logarithmic functions, their graphs and 
applications. 

f.To analyze the unit circle and apply trigonometric functions.

g.To study trigonometric functions and their graphs.

h.To analyze right triangle trigonometry through applications.

i.To study analytic trigonometry through trigonometric identities, formulas, 
and equations. 

j.To study systems of equations and inequalities through matrices and 
applications. 

k.To develop analytic geometry through the study of conic sections.

l.To develop an understanding of sequences and series.



8.Methods of Instruction:

a.Lecture

b.Class discussion

c.Group discussion

d.Computer applications

e.Graphing calculator applications



9. Assessment

There will be four tests during the semester.  The first test covers 
material 

from chapters 2 and 3, the second test covers chapter 4, the third test

Covers chapters 5 and 6 and the fourth test covers chapters 7, 8 and part of 
9.  There are no make-up tests students who miss a test will be assigned a 
grade of zero.  The use of graphing calculators or computers 

will be at the discretion of the instructor.









10.Instructional Materials:



a.Text:  Precalculus by Stewart, Redlin, Watson, 3rd Editition

b.Software Package:Computerized Tutorial (ancillary to text) by GWO, 
Brooks/Cole 

c.Computer software: Converge

d.Graphing calculator



e.Student Solutions Manual and Student Study Guide



11.Course Topics:

a.Functions:  characteristics, graphs and inverses

b.Polynomial and rational functions

c.Complex number system

d.Exponential and logarithmic functions, graphs, and applications

e.Trigonometric functions, graphs and applications

f.Inverse trigonometric functions and their graphs

g.Analytic trigonometry including trigonometric identities and trigonometric 
equations 

h.Conic sections

i.Systems of equations and inequalities including matrices

j.Sequences and series

k.Mathematical induction





Date(s) reviewed/revised:  May 2001 by B. Feneis
