Ocean County College

Course syllabus





1.Course Number and Title:MATH 241  Applied Calculus



2.Semester Hours:3Contact Hours:(30)

LecLab

3.Catalog Description:



This course is a survey of the major topics in calculus and their 

applications, without an emphasis on theory. The course topics include 

limits, derivatives ,integrals and their applications..  It is designed for 
the 

student needing calculus as a tool in other areas of study.  Technology will 

be employed throughout the course.  This course does not fulfill the 

calculus requirement for business, engineering, mathematics, or science 

majors.



4.Prerequisites:MATH 192, or MATH 195, or MATH 201 or high 

school Precalculus with a grade of B or higher.



5.Maximum Class Size:35

Lab Fee:0

Differential Funding Category:1



6.Justification:

a.Based on the recent explosion in technology and the expansion in 

the use of mathematics in other disciplines, it has been observed 

that students in non-science, non-mathematics majors are not 

being adequately prepared for future course work.  The 

Engineering and Business/Computer Science Departments have 

brought this to light.



b.There also has been a trend in four-year institutions to require 

some students to study calculus at a less-rigorous level.  This 

course would benefit that student and hopefully be a transferable 

course.



c.This course would better enable our students to function at a more 

competent level in todays technologically oriented society.







7.Course Objectives:

a.To evaluate limits.

b.To determine derivatives.

c.To determine and evaluate integrals.

d.To solve application problems involving derivatives and integrals.

e.To solve first order differential equations.



8.Methods of Instruction:

a.Lecture

b.Class discussion

c.Group discussion

d.Computer applications

e.Graphing calculator applications





9.Instructional Materials:

a.Text:  Calculus and its Applications, 6e, by Marvin L. Bittinger, 

Publisher:  Addison-Wesley

b.Handouts

c.Graphing calculator

d.Computer software:  Converge and/or Derive



10.Course Topics: 

a.Limits

b.The derivative and applications: maxima and minima, differential, 

transcendental functions

c.The integral and applications: formulas, means and root mean 

squares, volumes, centroids, moments of inertia

d.First Order Linear applications and differential equations



11.Grade Determinants:

Grade will be based upon performance on examinations and the quality

of assigned projects submitted.



The final grade in the course will be the cumulative grade based on the 
following 

letter grades or their numerical equivalents for the course assignments and 

examinations:



AExcellentBVery Good

BGoodCAbove Average

CAverageDPassing  Below Average

FFailure



12.Number of Papers and Examinations:

Assessment



In general, three tests are given of equal weight. Calculators are 

permitted with the exception of the TI 89 , TI 92, or equivalent 

calculator. No make-up tests are given.



Date(s) reviewed/revised: March 2003 by P. Mitchell
