            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

PART IGENERAL INFORMATION



1.Course Title: Internship Program 



2.Course Designation:  CIS- 294



3.Semester:   Spring 2006



4.Course Instructor:  CIS Faculty 



5.Catalogue Description:  2 Credits

      Students will intern in approved positions in the computer field. 
Students may already be employed full time but they must be part or full 
time PCCC students. In conjunction with the employers and the faculty, 
students establish learning objectives which are to be achieved during the 
semester. Students will work at the job site for a minimal of 8 hours per 
week. Supervision is provided by the College through on-the-job visits and 
individual progress review sessions. Students will also attend a bi weekly, 
one-hour seminar on campus. 



6.Number of Credits:  2 Credits



7.Number of Hours:  2 hours



8.Pre-requisites:

Prerequisite: 30 College credits (with 12 credits in CIS courses). 



9.Course Description:

      Students will intern in approved positions in the computer field. 
Students may already be employed full time but they must be part or full 
time PCCC students. In conjunction with the employers and the faculty, 
students establish learning objectives which are to be achieved during the 
semester. Students will work at the job site for a minimal of 8 hours per 
week. Supervision is provided by the College through on-the-job visits and 
individual progress review sessions. Students will also attend a bi weekly, 
one-hour seminar on campus. 

      





10.Course Objectives

Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:



a. Communicate (oral and written) with Information Technology management at 
a professional level. 

b. Demonstrate the capability to perform at a technical skill level of an 
entry level Information Technology professional. 

c. Utilize course content in a work environment.







PART IIREQUIRED AND RECOMMENDED TEXTS



1.Required Texts and Media: 



Texts: Not applicable









PART III     COURSE OUTLINE



  WEEK         TOPICS



1.Introduction to Program and Job Requirements.



2.Workshop  Professional Interaction One on One.



3.Campus Meeting with Faculty - progress review.



4.Meeting with CIS Job Coordinator / Developer - progress review.



5.Campus Meeting with Faculty - progress review.



6.Progress Review with supervisor.



7.Campus Meeting with Faculty - progress review.



8.Meeting with CIS Job Coordinator / Developer - progress review. 



9,Workshop  Write a resume.



10.Progress Review with supervisor.



11.Campus Meeting with Faculty - progress review.



12.Meeting with CIS Job Coordinator / Developer - progress review.



13.Campus Meeting with Faculty - progress review.



14.Workshop  Taking a Technical Interview.

Formal Review with supervisor



15.Campus Meeting with Faculty and CIS Job Coordinator / Developer.



16.Internship Presentation with updated resume.









PART IV METHODS OF EVALUATION






Method
Number
1. 
Bi Weekly Report
7
2. 
Faculty Review
7
3. 
Supervisor Progress Report
3
4. 
Updated Resume
1
5. 
Internship Presentation
1
6. 
Attendance
14 weeks
7. 
Letter of Recommendation
1




PART V GRADING FACTORS



Grading Criteria:




Criteria
Grade
1. 
Bi Weekly Report, Faculty Review, Updated Resume and a Letter of 
Recommendation 
25 
2. 
Supervisor Progress Report
25 
3. 
Internship Presentation
25 
4. 
Attendance
25 








PART VI   ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FOR A NEW COURSE.



1.Rationale

The Intern work experience program in which the student is employed (paid or 
not paid) in an Information Technology position in order to gain some of the 
practical experience necessary for success in the computing field. 



2.Programs in which the course is required.

None. Optional for CIS Majors.



3.Course replaced if any  None.



4.Number of courses now required in discipline - 20



5.Suggested offering cycle   Every semester



6.Special equipment needed  None



7.Additional faculty - None



9.Projected enrollment - 5 - 10



10.Overload - possible



11.Projected additional operational costs  Part  time Internship 
Coordinator. 





















PASSAIC   COUNTY   COMMUNITY   COLLEGE

COMPUTER  INFORMATION SCIENCES 

COURSE SYLLABUS



CIS 294 Internship Program





Page 1 of 5

CIS 294-CURR-20060329
