            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Course Outline

Computer Forensics and Investigations



Title:Computer Forensics and InvestigationsCourse Number:CIS 289

Number of Credits:  4                                Laboratory Hours: Open 
lab 

Textbooks: Guide to Computer Forensic and Investigations,

by Amelia Phillips, Bill Nelson, Frank Enfinger, Chris Steuart

Course Technology



Reference:  Incident Response: A Strategic Guide to Handling System and 
Network 

Security Breaches by Schulz and Shumway, (Prentice Hall)

      

Prerequisites: CIS 106, CIS 180, CIS 286 



Course Description:

Introduces the field of Computer Forensics with a comprehensive 
understanding of computer forensics and investigation tools and techniques. 
Students learn what computer forensics and investigations are and how they 
relate to corporate, civil and criminal investigations.  Students gain an 
understanding of the overall investigative process and an understanding of 
digital evidence preservation, image recovery, email investigations, network 
defense and countermeasures techniques. Students gain hands-on experience 
using several computer forensic tools. 



The course provides a range of laboratory and hands-on assignments that 
teach students about theory as well as the practical application of computer 
forensic investigation 



The course is mapped to the objectives of the international Association of 
Computer Investigative Specialists (ACIS) certification 



Course Outcome/Objective:

Upon completion of this course, students will be able to

 Demonstrate the process of data preservation, acquisition, computer 
forensic analysis, e-mail investigations, image file recovery, investigative 
report writing, and expert witness requirements. 

 Demonstrate use of several computer forensic software and hardware tools.

 Describe the major steps in computer forensic investigation process

 Describe the digital evidence controls and how to process crime and 
incident scenes 

 Describe data preservation and acquisition procedures

 Explain several analytical techniques used in computer forensics

 Set up an investigators office and laboratory 

 Explain the functions of the computer forensics profession

 Describe operating system (Microsoft, Unix, Linux, MAC) boot processes and 
disk structure 

Evaluation Criteria:

To assess the above student outcomes, students will be given written 
in-class exams, lab projects, homework assignments, and will be assigned an 
individual term project. In addition, students have to demonstrate a 
satisfactory level of knowledge and skills in: 

 Image recovery, email investigations and high tech report writing.

 Network forensics techniques

 Expert witness overview



Evaluation Method:

Students will be graded on the basis of testing and an evaluation of 
projects assigned by the instructor. The grade will be determined by the 
following:  40 written tests, 20 Lab Projects, 10 homework, 20 Final Exam 
and 10 attendance / class participation. 



Projects and homework will be assigned at the end of each chapter.  A 
minimum of 8 projects is required from each student.  Some of these projects 
will require group participation. 



The 20 (Lab projects) of the grade is based on keeping a project notebook. 
Students will be asked to obtain a small notebook or to use a lab notebook 
and keep notes on the results of the hands-on projects at the end of each 
chapter in the text. The notes will include comments that each student can 
use once the class is over to help describe results of the 
hands-on-projects. It will include any helpful tips or advice that might be 
use in the future. 



 Completion of an individual term project and presentation of findings are 
also required. 



Special Facilities/Equipment:



Hardware: Intel based system, Floppy Disks, IDE hard drives, IDE cables, 
Disk Jockey Forensic Kit, ICS DriveLock Firewire / USB, Tableau T8 Forensic 
USB Bridge, ForensicPC Ultimate Write Block Kit, ForensicPC Dual Xeon 
Workstation 



Software: Microsoft Windows 2000, Windows 2003 Server, Windows XP 
Professional, Linux and the Latest version of Windows NOS.  Demonstration 
versions of leading forensic analysis software including EnCase, DriveSpy, 
the Forensic Toolkit from Access Data, and freeware of versions of Linux 
based forensic analysis software. 



Resource Bibliography:

 Security Guide to Network Security Fundamentals by Cisco Learning 
Institute, Course Technology. 

 Guide to Network Defense and countermeasures by Greg Holden, Course 
Technology. 

 Guide to Network Firewalls and Network Security by Greg Holden, Course 
Technology 

 Guide to Disaster Recovery by Michael Erbschioe, Course Technology.

 



 Weekly Detail Course Outline:



Week 1:Computer Forensics and Investigations as a Profession

Week 2: Understanding Computer Investigations

Week 3: The Investigators Office and Laboratory

Week 4:Current Computer Forensics Tools

Week 5: Processing Crime and Incident Scenes

Exam 1

Week 6: Digital Evidence Controls

Week 7: Working with Windows and DOS Systems

Week 8: Macintosh and Linux Boot Processes and File Systems

Week 9: Data Acquisition

Week 10: Computer Forensics Analysis

Exam 2

Week 11:Recovering Image Files

Week 12:Network Forensics

Week 13: E-Mail Investigations

Week 14. Becoming an Expert Witness and Reporting Results of Investigations 

Project Presentations

Week 15:Final Exam





Note  See The attached tool list

















PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

Department of Computer Information Sciences             Spring 2007





Cybersecurity/ Computer Forensics Certificate              1 of 3
