            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

                             2

              PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

              COMPUTER AND INFORMATION SCIENCES

                              

                       COURSE SYLLABUS

                              

PART I  GENERAL INFORMATION



1.   Course Title:  Capstone Project



2.   Catalogue Designation:  CIS 295



3.   Semester:  Spring 2003



4.   Course Instructor:  CIS Faculty



5.   Catalogue Description: 1 Credit



  Under the guidance of a faculty advisor, students in

  their final semester will be required to use the full

  scope of their academic training to design and develop an

  individual project appropriate for their option.  The

  project will entail system documentation, design,

  writing, user manuals, and other support materials.  The

  student will be required to present the results of the

  project at various stages to the class. There will be a

  final presentation made to the faculty who will critique

  the projects content, approach, and degree of

  professionalism on the basis of program outcomes and a

  scoring rubric.

  

  

        Prerequisites:  MS Office and Productivity Prog

  Option: CIS 123 and CIS 202

               Network Administration Option: CIS 182 and

            CIS 202

                                          User Support 

  Services Option: CIS 116 and CIS 202

               Web Technology Option: CIS 171 and CIS 202

  

  

Course Goals



     Upon completion of the course, the student will be able

to:



                Complete a project that will be used to assess the

               student outcomes of  the individual CIS options





















PART II:  COURSE OUTLINE





WEEK





  1                                 Develop and Describe

project



  2 - 15                         Work on project and meet

with faculty



PART III: GRADING



     Students grades will be determined by the use of a

rubric applied to student outcomes defined for each

individual option.





PART IV:  OTHER  INFORMATION





Programs required in:  All CIS options



Course replaced if any - None



Present number of courses in discipline - 33



Offering cycle suggested -  Fall and Spring Semesters



Special equipment needed  - CIS computer labs



Additional faculty -  None



Overload -   Probable



          Four ( 4 ) sections scheduled with four ( 4 )

          different faculty. Each option will be scheduled

          under a different section for the course.



Projected additional operational costs -  None



Projected enrollment:  10 each semester



Rationale:   This course will be used to assess the program

outcomes of each option in the Computer Information Systems

major.
