            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Course Outline



Networking Security Fundamentals



Title: Network Security FundamentalsCourse Number: CIS 286AB1

Number of Credits:  3Laboratory Hours: Open lab

Textbooks:Security  Guide to NETWORK SECURITY Fundamentals

                         By Paul Cretario, Course Technology 



Reference: Principles of Computer Security (Security and Beyond), 

           By Wm. Author Conklin, McGraw-Hill 

   

Prerequisites: CIS 180







Course Description:

Introduces students to the basics of network security principles, including 
authentication methods, malicious code, network and wireless security 
techniques to safeguard against intrusions on file transfer services, 
e-mail, web applications.  Students learn how this field relates to other 
areas of information technology. Students gain network security practice 
using hands-on lab exercises. This course prepares students for COMPTIAs 
security certification exam and an entry-level information security position 
in the IT field. 

Course Outcome/Objective:

Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:

 Explain, implement and configure different authentication methods.

 Explain and implement methods to manage different types of attacks and 
malicious code. 

 Identify the role of firewalls, routers, and other networking hardware 
security measures. 

 Explain and implement methods to manage security vulnerabilities associated 
with remote access services, web applications, TCP/IP protocols, directory 
and file transfer services, and e-mail 

 Explain security issues related to wireless networking and instant 
messaging. 

 Determine the goals and factors involved in a secure network strategy, 
including physical security concerns and disaster recovery 















Evaluation Criteria:



To assess the above student outcomes, students will be given written 
in-class exams, lab projects and homework assignment. In addition, students 
have to demonstrate a satisfactory level of knowledge and Lab skills in the 
following Security exam objectives: 

 General security Concepts (Access control, Authentication, Attacks etc).

 Communication security (Email, Web, FTP, wireless etc)

 Infrastructure security (Devices, Security baselines, Application 
hardening, Media, Topologies, Intrusion detection) 

 Basics of Cryptography (PKI, Certificates)

 Operational and organizational security (Physical security, Social 
Engineering, Security policy) 



Evaluation Method:

Students will be graded on the basis of testing and an evaluation of 
projects assigned by the instructor. The grade will be determined by the 
following:  40 written tests, 20 Lab Projects, 10 homework, 20 Final Exam 
and 10 attendance / participation. 

Projects and homework will be assigned at the end of each chapter and a 
minimum of 8 projects is required from each student. Some of these projects 
will require group participation. 



The 20 (Lab projects) of the grade is based on keeping a project notebook. 
Students will be asked to obtain a small notebook or to use a lab notebook 
and keep notes on the results of the hands-on projects at the end of each 
chapter in the text. The notes will include comments that each student can 
use once the class is over to help describe results of the 
hands-on-projects. It will include any helpful tips or advice that might be 
use in the future. 



Special Facilities/Equipment:

Hardware: Intel based system, notebook computer, a wireless NIC, and a Cisco 
Aironet access point or 3Com AirConnect access point 

Software:  Windows 2003 Server, Windows XP Professional or the Latest 
version of Windows NOS. Free and open source downloadable software including 
Knoppix-STD (Security Tools Distribution) Live CD, Fingerprint Synthesis, 
BitDefender and FreeAVG Antivirus. 



Resource Bibliography:

 Security Guide to Network Security Fundamentals by Cisco Learning 
Institute, Course Technology. 

 2600: The Hacker Quarterly

 Principles of information Security by M. Whitman and H. Mattord, Course 
Technology. 

 Network Security A hackers Perspective by A Fadia, Premier Press.

 Invasion Privacy by M. Weber, Premier Press.

 A Guide to Operating systems Security by Michael Palmer, Course Technology

 Biometrics for networking security by P. Reid, Prentice hall.



 

 Weekly Detail Course Outline:



WEEK 1    Chapter oneOperating Systems Security: Keeping 

      Computers and Networks Security



WEEK 2  3   Chapter twoViruses, Worms, and Malicious Software



WEEK 4Chapter three            Security through Authentication and 
\Encryption 



WEEK 5Chapter FourAccount-based Security

EXAM ONE



WEEK 6  7Chapter Five File, Directory, and Shared Resources

       Security 



WEEK 8Chapter SixFirewalls and Border Security 



WEEK 9Chapter Seven Physical and Network Topology Security  

                        

      

WEEK 10Chapter Eight Wireless Security



EXAM TWO



WEEK 11Chapter Nine             Web, Remote Access, VPN Security



WEEK 12Chapter TenE-mail Security



WEEK 13Chapter Eleven          Security through Disaster Recovery



WEEK 14Chapter Twelve          Security through Monitoring and Auditing

Final Review



WEEK 15Final Exam

AB1Formerly CIS 210

















PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

Computer Information SciencesSpring 2007



Cybersecurity / Computer Forensics Certificate             1 of 3
