            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

              PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

                   MATHEMATICS DEPARTMENT

                          FALL 2004



I.    COURSE CODE:       MA 111

II.   COURSE TITLE:      Business Calculus

III. PREREQUISITES:      MA 108

IV.   NUMBER OF CREDITS:      4 hours lecture (4 credits)

V.    INSTRUCTORS NAME:

      OFFICE:            A-220A

      ADDRESS:

      PHONE:

      E-MAIL ADDRESS:

      OFFICE HOURS:

VI.   COURSE DESCRIPTION:

          Introduction to calculus with applications to

          business. Topics include functions, curve

          sketching, differentiation and integration of

          algebraic, exponential and logarithmic functions,

          applications of the derivative, optimization,

          modeling and integration.



VII. COURSE OBJECTIVES:

          Upon successfully completing the course, the

student will be able to:

          1.   Use linear, quadratic, exponential and logarithmic

               functions to model situations.

2.   Calculate derivatives of various functions by using

product, quotient and chain rules.

3.   Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

          4.   Analyze the graphs of functions (identify and determine

               critical points, points of inflection, intervals of

               increase, decrease and concavity) by applying technology and

               the theory of first and second derivatives.

5.   Employ the derivative to solve various applications

problems, such as related rates, optimization, and graph

sketching.

          6.   Differentiate and integrate polynomial, exponential,

               logarithmic and rational functions.

7.   Calculate integrals to find areas of regions and find

the total cost, revenue or profit.

8.   Solve business problems involving applications of

differential and integral calculus.

9.   Compute and interpret partial derivatives and solve

optimization problems.

10.  Use graphing calculators to confirm the results of

analyses.

          

IX.   TEXT:    Applied Calculus (with InfoTrac) (Stefan

Waner, Steven

               Costenoble)

               Graphing calculator is required (TI-83 is

preferred).



X.    EVALUATION:



          Tests                                   60

          Cumulative Final Examination            30

          Attendance, homework, and class participation

          10

                                             100



          The five in-class tests will be given according to

          the course calendar schedule. There will be no

          make-up tests. Due to this fact, the lowest grade

          will be dropped from the final average.



          Attendance is mandatory There are 28 class

          sessions during the semester. School policy states

          that absences in excess of 25 will result in

          automatic failure.



          If you have a disability and believe you need

          accommodation(s) in my classroom please see your

          counselor or Mr. Walter Donofrio, Room S204, (973)

          684-6395, or contact the secretary in the

          Counseling Department at ext. 5568. If you require

          testing accommodations, you must notify me one

          week in advance of the test.



                         GRADE DISTRIBUTION:



               A    ---  93 - 100

               A-   ---  90 - 92

          B   ---  87 - 89

          B    ---  83 - 86

          B-        ---  80 - 82

                         C   ---  75 - 79

               C    ---  70 - 74
