            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

1



Page 1 of 4                                        1/14/2005

              Raritan Valley Community College

            Outline for Proposals for New Courses





I. Basic Course Information



       A.   Date: September 2003

          

B.   Course Prefix and Title:  CISY 266 Microsoft.NET

Databases



C.   Sponsoring Department: Computer Science and Educational

Technology



D.   Course Developer:  Steven Schwartz



E.   Semester Credit Hours:  3



F.   Weekly Contact Hours :  4          Lecture 2

                                                      Lab

2



G.   Prerequisites:  Introduction to Visual Basic.NET,

Active Server Pages.NET, or permission of the Instructor



H.   Laboratory Fees:  Yes, at current rate



       I.   Dept. Chair:  Dr. Thomas Edmunds

       (tedmundsraritanval.edu)



II.  Catalog Description



This course will instruct students on how to create database

driven, Windows and Web based applications using the Visual

Basic.NET programming language. The applications will

communicate with both Access and SQL Server databases using

ADO.NET, Microsofts latest data access technology.



III.  Statement of Course Need



The introduction of Microsofts .NET Framework marks the

beginning of major revisions to all of its programming

languages.

.NET is the programming model for building, deploying, and

running Web-based applications, smart client applications,

and XML Web services. Because it controls memory management,

developers can focus on writing applications business

logic.

Students enrolled this course will already have a solid

foundation in developing applications in either Introduction

to Visual Basic.NET or Active Server Pages.NET. However,

just about every software application connects to a database

of one kind or another. In todays difficult job market,

students need to leave Raritan Valley Community College with

sufficient programming skills so they may be productive

immediately without requiring excessive additional training.

       

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum

       A.   CIS Programming Elective

       B.    Requirement in the .NET Certificate Program, currently

       in development.

C.   Free Elective

D.   Transfers as an elective

       



V. Outline of Course Content



This course will explore the following topics:



     v    Introduction to ADO.NET

v    Structured Query Language (SQL)

v    Connecting to a Remote SQL Server

v    Typed and Un-typed Datasets

v    Bound and Unbound Controls

v    Data Adapter Configuration Wizard

v    Validating Data

v    Data Views

v    Parameterized Queries

v    Relationships

v    Data Commands

v    Dataset Schemas

v    Database Classes

v    DataList and DataGrid Controls

v    Using XML

v    Using Crystal Reports

v    The Server Explorer



VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes



General Education Goals



After completion of this course, the student will



1.   Apply creativity to problem solving decision making

  and quantitative reasoning. (RVCC General Education Goals

  1E, 1F, 1G, and 5B)

2.   Describe the importance of ADO.NET and explain the

procedures underlying its use. (RVCC General Education Goal

3C)

3.   Demonstrate proficiency in the use of an object

oriented programming language. (RVCC General Education Goal

3D)

4.   Build communication skills (effective writing and

speaking) through collaborative learning, utilizing team

projects and multi-tasking.   (RVCC General Education Goals

2A and 2B)





Student Learning Outcomes:



At the conclusion of the course, students will be able to:

1.   Create an application written in VB.NET that accesses,

  adds, and removes data from a remote database.

2.   Compare/contrast typed and un-typed datasets.

3.   Compare/contrast bound and unbound controls

4.   Compare/contrast Windows and Web based data access.

5.   Utilize the Structured Query Language (SQL) to design

efficient queries.





VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning

           lecture/discussion

    student collaboration via small-group work

    computer-assisted instruction

    laboratory assignments

    student collaboration

    independent study projects

       

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments

           research paper

    computer programs

    Exams/Quizzes/Homework Assignments

    hands-on ADO.NET  lab projects

     

IX. Grade Determinants

           Homework

            o    The student will complete six homework assignments

               throughout the semester. The assignments will relate to the

               topics currently being discussed in class.

           Research Paper

            o    The student will complete a research paper focusing on

               a single ADO.NET class. The paper will contain a minimum of

               five sources. Allowable sources include trade books,

               journals, and .NET related Web sites.

           Exams

            o    Exams will be given three times during the course of

               the semester. Test questions will be multiple choice, short

               answer, fill in the blank, true/false, and coding.

           Computer Programs

            o    Four labs will be assigned during the courses

               duration. Students will be required to follow lab

               specifications to completion with a minimum of errors. .

               Labs must also be clearly documented so other users may

               comprehend the codes purpose and logic.



X.  Required Materials



Textbook:

     Murachs VB.NET Database Programming with ADO.NET

     Anne Prince and Doug Lowe

     Publisher: Mike Murach and Associates

     ISBN: 1-890774-19-7



Web sources (See Resources)



XI. Resources

    http://www.gotdotnet.com/

    http://groups.google.com/groupshlenlrieUTF-

8groupmicrosoft.public.dotnet

    http://www.microsoft.com/net/

    http://www.dotnetbooks.com/

    http://www.xtras.net/VisualStudio.Net.asp

    http://www.murach.com/books/adon/index.htm

    http://www.learnvisualstudio.net/

    http://www.codeproject.com/dotnet/ADO2ENET

    http://www.123aspx.com/directory.aspxdir40

     
