            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

 

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 

 

CISY293- Computer Science Cooperative Education II 

 

 

I. Basic Course Information 

 

A. Course Number and Title: CISY293 – Computer Science Cooperative 
Education II 

 

B. New or Modified Course: Modified 

 

C. Date of Proposal: Semester: Fall Year: 2016 

 

D. Effective Term: Fall 2017 

 

E. Sponsoring Department: Computer Science 

 

F. Semester Credit Hours: 3 

 

G. Weekly Contact Hours: Lecture: N/A 

 Laboratory: N/A 

 Work Site: 135 hours 

 Out of class student work per week: 

 

H. Prerequisites: CISY 292 Computer Science Cooperative 
Education I, Coop Coordinator’s Approval, 
Coordinator is Stephen Brower, 
stephen.brower@raritanval.edu 

 

 

I. Laboratory Fees: None 

 

J. Name and Telephone Number or E-Mail Address of Department Chair: 
Steven Schwarz, steven.schwarz@raritanval.edu 

 


 

II. Catalog Description 

 

Prerequisite: CISY 292 Computer Science Cooperative Education I and Coop 
Coordinator’s Approval. Students learn best by doing. Co-operative Work 
Experience Education offers students an on-the-job training program directly related 
to their academic major and career interests. Its purposes are to help students choose a 
career, find the right job and achieve success on the job. It provides a supervised off-
campus work assignment through which students earn degree credit and in most 
situations, a salary as well. If the experience used is at the same employer as the 
experience used for the prerequisite, the coop coordinator will determine if different 
language(s) or technologies are used, or has different goals established for this 
experience. 

 

III. Statement of Course Need 

 

A. Co-operative education opportunities are an integral part of the experiential 
learning process for students seeking careers in Information Technology field. 
This course will afford the student an opportunity to connect the academic 
material with the day-to-day responsibilities of Information Technology 
professions. By interacting with practitioners, students develop marketable 
skills and begin to establish valuable networks. Through observation and 
participation, students are better informed to decide on career choices. 


 

B. The lab component for this course consists of 135 hours at a selected worksite 
in an Information Technology field. 


 

C. This course may transfer as a computer elective. 


 

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

 

A. Free Elective 
B. This course is an program option for: 
1. Computer Networking AAS Degree 
2. Computer Networking Cisco Emphasis Certificate 
3. Computer Programming AAS Degree 
4. Computer Support Certificate 
5. Information Systems & Technology AAS Degree 
6. Multimedia Communications AAS Degree 
7. Multimedia Communications Certificate 
C. This course serves as a CIS Elective on the Computer Science Elective List 
D. To see course transferability: a) for New Jersey schools, go to the NJ Transfer 
website, www.njtransfer.org; b) for all other colleges and universities, go to 
the individual websites. 


 


 

V. Outline of Course Content 

 

A. Students and agency supervisors will develop a set of five substantive goals 
for completion during the course of the semester. These goals will be 
approved by the program coordinator. Students will keep a daily journal of 
observations, experiences and analyses of practices. Students will also keep 
regular time records, which will be verified by the agency supervisor and 
complete regular evaluations of progress toward their goals. 


 

B. In addition to regular communication and collaboration with the coordinator, 
the student will attend three scheduled seminars with the Computer Science 
cooperative education coordinator. 


 

C. Student will write a paper that addresses their experiences in their position and 
how it relates to the material learned in academic courses and will compare 
the experience to the one in used for the prerequisite 


 

VI. General Education and Course Learning Outcomes 

 

A. General Education Learning Outcomes: 


 

 At the completion of the course, students will: 

 

1. Produce written work that reflects critical analysis of their experience, 
observation and participation at their agency. (GE-NJ 1) 
2. Develop the ability to communicate clearly and logically, using both 
verbal and writing skills, with members of the Information Technology 
Organizations and its end clients. (GE-NJ 1) 


 B. Course Learning Outcomes: 

 

 At the completion of the course, students will be able to: 

 

1. Apply hands on skills learned such as 
a. troubleshooting client/server computer issues 
b. configuring computer networks 
c. designing, developing and coding in programming languages 
d. designing, developing, and deploying Web Pages / Web Sites 




 

2. Write about the learning experience in the position and to compare how 
this experience was different than the experience used in the prerequisite. 


 

 C. Assessment Instruments 

 

 


1. Supervisor reports of hours worked and tasks completed 
2. Written paper 
3. Regular communication with coop coordinator 


 

VII. Grade Determinants 

 

Due to the nature of the course, traditional types of evaluation are less appropriate 
and as such, various subjective methods of evaluation are necessary. 

 

Student grades will be based in part on: 

A. the agency supervisor’s evaluation of the student’s on-the-job performance 
B. the student’s ability to demonstrate to the coordinator that he/she has 
experienced academic benefit from the work assigned 
C. the student’s daily journal 
D. written paper. 


 

Modes of Teaching and Learning 

A. On the job training, observation, participation and experience 
B. Regular communication and collaboration with coordinator. 


 

VIII. Texts and Materials 

 

A book will be selected depending on the technology used and the nature of the 
position. 

 

(Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course content and 
resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC Bookstore 
is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks.) 

 

IX. Resources 

 

The course will take place off-campus, at the workplace, and no special RVCC 
resources will be required. 

 


