            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

1



                              

                              

                              

                              

I.    Basic Course Information



  A.   Course Number and Title:



     CISY-294, ORACLE: Database Administration Fundamentals Part



     I



  B.   Date of Proposal: November 2001



  C.   Sponsoring Department: Computer Information Systems



     (CIS)



  D.   Semester Credit Hours: 3



  E.   Weekly Contact Hours:    Lecture   2

                         Lab       2

  F.   Prerequisite: INTRO TO ORACLE: SQL  PL/SQL or

     permission of instructor

     

  G.   Laboratory Fees: Yes



  H:   Dept. Chair:  Dr Thomas Edmunds,

  tedmundsraritanval.edu

II.  Catalog Description



This course is designed to give future Oracle database

administrators (DBAs) a firm foundation in basic database

administrative tasks. Students will gain a conceptual

understanding of the Oracle database architecture and how

the architectural structures work and interact with one

another. Students will also learn how to create an

operational database and properly manage the various

structures in an effective and efficient manner in order to

have a well-designed and operational database.



  

III.



     Statement of Course Need



This  course prepares students for entry-level positions  in

Oracle   Database  administration.   A  vast   majority   of

professional  Relational Database Developers use  Oracle  as

the  tool  of  choice  for  database  deployment.   Database

Administrators  need to design and implement Databases  that

can   be   effective   repositories  of   critical   company

information.



Oracle University offers five courses that are required  for

individuals that want Oracle DBA certification.   The  first

course,  Introduction to Oracle: SQL and PL/SQL, is  already

offered  by  RVCC under the same name.  This is through  the

Oracle  Academic Initiative.  The second course that  Oracle

offers is called Oracle 9i DBA Fundamentals I.  This course,

ORACLE:  Database Administration Fundamentals Part I,  would

mirror Oracle Universitys course.



IV.   Place of Course in College Curriculum



     C. CIS Programming Elective

     

     



V.   General Education Goals



     1.   The student will develop the ability to think

       critically

2.   The student will develop the ability to reason

quantitatively





VI.  Student Learning Outcomes



At the conclusion of the course, students will be able to:

          

    Create an operational database

    Manage Oracle database files

    Manage tablespaces, segments, extents, and blocks

    Manage users, privileges, and resources

    Start up and shut down an Oracle instance and database

     



VII. Outline of Course Content



     The theory of database administration is applied

through numerous Lab Exercises.  At the end of the semester,

a final project is assigned to successfully create a

database.  The three major content providers are (1) The

textbook, (2) Instructors lectures, and (3) experiences

gained in lab work.  The Outline for the Course is below.

This outline can be adapted by individual instructors

according to the steps in which they cover content.  The

outline provided is from Oracles Academic Initiative

website for Oracle 9i DBA Fundamentals I



     ORACLE: DATABASE ADMINISTRATION FUNDAMENTALS PART I

                              

                       COURSE OUTLINE

     

           Oracle Architectural Components

            o    Understanding the physical structure

o    Understanding the memory structure

o    Understanding the process structure

o    Understanding the logical structure

o    Outlining the stages of an SQL statement

o    Defining an Oracle Database, the Oracle server, and the

Oracle Instance

           Getting Started with the Oracle Server

            o    Identifying database administrative tools

o    Identifying the features of the Universal Installer

           Managing an Oracle Instance

            o    Creating, managing, and using initialization files:

               PFILE and SPFILE

o    Identifying the various states of starting an instance

o    Identifying the various options available to shutdown

an instance

o    Monitoring Alert and Trace files

           Creating a Database

            o    Using the Database Configuration Assistant to create a

               database

o    Creating a database manually

           Using the Data Dictionary

            o    Identifying the uses and contents of the data

               dictionary

o    Using the data dictionary to obtain information about

the database

           Maintaining the Control File

            o    Explaining the uses of the control file

o    Listing the contents of the control file

           Maintaining Redo Log Files

            o    Explaining the use of online redo log files

o    Explaining the structure of online redo log files

           Managing Tablespaces and Data Files

            o    Outlining the database storage hierarchy

o    Identifying the types of tablespaces

           Storage Structure and Relationships

            o    Outlining the various segment types and their uses

o    Outlining the storage clause precedence

           Managing Undo Data

            o    Understanding the purpose of undo data

o    Managing undo data

           Managing Tables

            o    Outlining the various Oracle data types

o    Explaining the two types of ROWID formats

           Managing Indexes

            o    Classification of types and uses indexes

o    Creating b-tree and bitmap indexes

           Maintaining Data Integrity

            o    Identifying the various types and states of constraints

o    Implementing data integrity constraints

           Managing Password Security and Resources

            o    Managing passwords using profiles

o    Administering profiles

           Managing Users

            o    Defining database schema and objects

o    Creating new database users

           Managing Privileges and Roles

            o    Identifying system and object privileges

o    Granting and revoking privileges

           Using Globalization Support

            o    Choosing character set and national character set for a

               database

o    Specifying the language-dependent behavior



VIII.     Suggested Materials



     A. Books

     

     Suggested Textbook:   Oracle 9i: DBA Handbook, Kevin

            Loney, Marlene L. Theriault, Osborne/McGraw-

            Hill, 2001

     

     Oracle 8i: The Compete Reference, George Koch, Kevin

     Loney, Osborne/McGraw-Hill, 2000

     

     Oracle 8i Advanced PL/SQL Programming, Scott Urman,

     Osborne/McGraw-Hill, 2000

     

     Oracle Performance Tuning Tips  Techniques, Richard

     Niemiec, Osborne/McGraw-Hill, 1997

     

     B. Equipment

     

     This course can be taught effectively on Oracle 9i

     running on a UNIX platform preferably on an HP 9000 but

     adequately on a SUN SPARC workstation.  This will allow

     the students to connect via telnet which would require

     minimal PCs.
