            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



1



              RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

                              

                              



I.    Basic Course Information



  A.   Date of Revision:  Spring 2002



  B.   Course Developer:   Pratap Reddy



  C.   Course Number and Title: CISY-103, Computer Concepts



     and Programming (was CISY-101, Computer Fundamentals)



  D.   Sponsoring Department: Computer Information Systems



     (CIS)



  E.   Semester Credit Hours: 4



  F.   Weekly Contact Hours: 5 (3, 2)



  G.   Prerequisite:  Algebra Mod 2: Linear Behavior (or

     proficiency as evidenced by placement test)

  

  H.   Laboratory Fees: Yes, at current rate



  I.    Dept. Chair:  Tom Edmunds (tedmundsraritanval.edu)



II.  Catalog Description



This course is designed for students majoring in Computer

Information Systems.  An overview of information processing

including computer applications, algorithms, documentation,

and analysis of problems for computer solutions.  Topics

include computer hardware and software, data representation

and organization, programming in QBASIC, a survey of

computer languages and computer systems design concepts.



III. Statement of Course Need



This course provides students with detail instructions on

the computer systems (hardware and software).  Students will

explore what a computer is and what it does, what is data

and how it is organized, the different types of computers in

use today, and the advantages and disadvantages computers

present society.  Students will delve in depth into the

operations of the Central Processing Unit.  They will also

be able to recognize by sight the various components of the

system unit and name its principal function.  Throughout the

course students will spend a considerable amount of time

studying different input, output and storage devices.

In this course students will receive an overview of the

topics discussed in other CIS courses.  For instance,

students will learn about various computer applications,

such as the Microsoft Office Suite.  Discussions will be

held about different programming languages, especially

regarding those taught at Raritan Valley Community College.

They will also be introduced to computer networking, systems

analysis, and systems software.

In this course students will receive hands-on training in

programming in the QBASIC language.  Students will be

required to use the QBASIC programming skills they acquire

throughout the course to analyze real problems, design a

solution, write the program, and finally test and debug the

program.  Students will master such programming tools as

structure charts, pseudocode, and flowcharts.

The skills acquired throughout this course are a valuable

asset in other computer science or programming courses

students may take at Raritan Valley Community College or at

other institutions or higher learning.   The set of skills

they acquire while learning to program in QBASIC serve as

the foundation for programming on other computer languages.



IV.   Place of Course in College Curriculum



     Required for following degree programs:

      Management Information Systems (A.S.)

    Computer Networking (A.A.S.)

    Computer Programming (A.A.S.)

    Microcomputer (A.A.S.)

     

     Required for following certificate programs:

      Computer Networking

    Computer Programming

    Microcomputer

    Systems Analyst

    UNIX/C

    PC Support

     



V.   Student Learning Outcomes



At the conclusion of the course, students will be able to:

      Understand the computers role in the workplace

    Recognize the various components of a computer system

and their principle function

    Describe what a computer is and how it works

    Describe the different types of computers available

today

    Understand in detail how the CPU works

    Describe how the decimal, binary and hexadecimal

numbering systems work

    Convert values in one numbering system to another

    Describe the role of secondary storage devices

including magnetic disk, optical disk, and magnetic tape

systems

    Identify several types of input and output devices and

explain their functions

    Describe the major classes of software available in the

marketplace

    Detail the role of a utility program and outline

several duties that each program performs

    Describe several uses of telecommunication technology

in use today

    Describe the features of commonly used word processing,

spreadsheet, database, and presentation application software

    Identify and describe the components of the systems

development life cycle

    Describe a number of productivity tools used by

computer professionals to develop application software

    Understand the advantages and disadvantages computers

have brought to society

    Design, write and test simple computer programs using

the QBASIC language to solve everyday problems

    Design the solution to a problem using such tools as

pseudocode code, structure charts, and flowcharts



VI.  General Education Goals and Objectives



     1.   The student will develop the ability to think

       critically in developing solutions to common programming

       problems

2.   The student will develop the skills necessary to

evaluate and solve problems



VII.  Outline of Course Content



      INTRODUCTION

  1.   What is the computer and what does it do

2.   Types of computers

3.   Social Issues brought upon by Computers

      HARDWARE

  4.   The computer system

5.   The CPU and how it works

6.   Binary and Hexadecimal Numbering systems

7.   Secondary Storage

8.   Tapes and Disks

9.   Printers and Display Devices

      SOFTWARE

  10.  The Operating System

11.  Utility Programs

      COMPUTER NETWORKS

  12.   Telecommunication Applications in use Today

13.   Network Topologies

14.  LANs and WANs and other Networks

      INFORMATION SYSTEMS

  15.  Computer Systems commonly found in Organizations

16.  The Systems Development Life Cycle

17.  Application Software development process

      PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE

  18.  Word Processing and Desktop Publishing

19.  Spreadsheets and Presentation Graphics

20.  Database Management

      QBASIC

  21.  Introduction to Structure Programming and Problem

     Solving

22.  Input and Output Statements

23.  Control Structures

24.  Programming for Decisions (Modularizing Programs)

25.  Programming for Repetition (Loop Structures)

26.  Functions and Debugging and Testing

27.  Arrays and Searching and Sorting



VIII. Textbook:  Parker, Charles S. Understanding Computers

  Today and Tomorrow - 2000 Edition, The Dryden Press,

  ISBN: 0-03-025968-1
