            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

COMPUTER SCIENCE (CS) DEPARTMENT





CISY-233 Relational Database  Web Applications





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: CISY- 233, Relational Database  Web Applications 

B. Date of Proposal or Revision: Spring 2007 

C. Sponsoring Department: Computer Science (CS) Department 

D. Semester Credit Hours: 3 

E. Weekly Contact Hours: 4 (2 Lecture) 

(2 Lab) 

F. Prerequisite: CISY 225 Web Page Development I  CIS Programming Elective 

G. Laboratory Fees: Yes

H. Dept. Chair: Dr. John Sullivan, jsullivararitanval.edu 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite: CISY 225 Web Page Development I  CIS Programming Elective. 

This course is an introduction to the use of relational databases on the 
World Wide 

Web. Topics covered will be relational database design, database 
connectivity and 

manipulation. Students will work with a server-side tool to build and query 
databases 

using SQL. This course will add more power and functionality to Web sites, 
add 

some database applications like a powerful shopping cart or a fun quiz game. 
A major 

emphasis of the course is SQL and how to utilize it to build, manipulate and 
create 

output from a database. Toward the end of the course, students will have an 

opportunity to work with SQL to create output from a database to a web page. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

As more and more businesses create web pages on Internet, there is a great 
need for 

people with the technical knowledge to do interactive Web page development 
that 

interfaces with databases. 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

A. Required for following degree programs: 

1. Required course for Web Page Development Certificate 

2. Required course for the Web Page Development Transfer Degree 

3. Upgrading course for multimedia professionals 



4. Free elective 

5. CIS Programming Elective 

B. Course Transferability: It is yet to be determined how this course would 
transfer 

to New Jersey Colleges. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

1. Relational databases 

2. Forms 

3. Programming with SQL 

4. Work with server side tools to build and query databases 

5. Create interactive database reliant Web pages. 

6. SQL 

a. Utilize 

b. Build 

c. Manipulate and Create output from Databases 

7. Install and configure Apache, PHP, and MySQL on both Windows and Linux. 

8. Accept and process information submitted via HTML forms. 

9. Authenticate users and track user preferences and data using PHPs 
session- 

handling capabilities. 

10. Process web-based file uploads using the HTTPUpload PEAR package. 

11. Create your own RSS aggregator using Magpie, and process XML files in 

amazingly efficient fashion using SimpleXML. 

12. Use both command-line and graphical MySQL clients to effectively manage 
your 

data. 

13. Secure the MySQL server, creating roles and restricting access even at 
very 

granular levels. 

14. Effectively integrate PHP and MySQL to create dynamic, data-driven web 

applications.

VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

Education Goals 



At the completion of this course, the student will be able to: 



1. Demonstrate proficiency in designing and developing relational databases 
that can 

be retrieved from the Internet (G.E. 1) 

2. Communicate and collaborate with others creating Web Pages that are more 

power and add functionality to Web sites (G.E. 2) 

3. Demonstrate proficiency in using the computer to create forms, 
JavaScript, 

collect, prepare and present documents that summarize and synthesis 
information 

(G.E. 2, 3) 

4. Demonstrate knowledge and skills necessary to design, develop manipulate 
SQLs 

for standard Web site design (G.E. 2, 3) 



5. Apply knowledge from other disciplines to develop web pages that can be 
used in 

problem solving or decision making (G.E. 4) 

6. Apply knowledge of SQL programming to Web page development Should it be 

(G.E. 1, 3, 7). 

7. Recognize the ethical issues surrounding the use of computers in creating 
web 

pages (G.E. 5) 

8. Recognize the commonalities and differences in values, perspectives and 

behaviors of diverse people in the development of web pages (G.E. 6) 

Learning Outcomes 



At the conclusion of the course, students will be able to: 



1. Discuss the features of well designed web sites to meet the communication 
needs 

of the client from a database point of view. 

2. Describe how SQL is used in the development of web sites 

3. Design and publish web pages featuring server tools to build and query 
interactive 

databases 

4. Develop web pages using appropriate SQL syntax 

5. Connect to remote databases to download information 

6. Link web pages to other pages on the Internet 

7. Interpret current copyright laws concerning information 

8. Design and develop Web sites using standard Web server tools. 

9. Develop more power and functionality to Web sites, by adding some 
database 

applications like a powerful shopping cart or a fun quiz game. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

 Lecture/Discussion - Lecture with demonstration of software, problem 
solving 

techniques, and present computer literacy concepts. 

 Laboratory  Lab time to analyze, design, develop, write, and present 
computer 

projects. 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

 Computer Projects  In-class and out of class assignments and projects 

 Exam  Hands on software exams 

 Presentations 

 Other  Homework 

IX. Grade Determinants 

 Projects 

 Presentations 

 Homework 

 Hands on Software Exams 

 Final Exam 



X. Suggested Materials 

Textbooks: Creating Database Web Applications with PHP and ASP, by Jeanine 

Meyer Charles River Media 1 edition (June 30, 2003), ISBN-10: 1584502649 



AJAX and PHP: Building Responsive Web Applications by Cristian Darie, 

Bogdan Brinzarea, Filip Chereches-Tosa, Mihai Bucica, Publisher: Packt 
Publishing 

ISBN-10: 1904811825 



Beginning PHP and MySQL 5: From Novice to Professional, Second Edition, by 



W. Jason Gilmore, Publisher: Apress 2nd edition (January 23, 2006), ISBN-10: 

1590595521 

XI. Resources 

 Computer access, RVCC2 server, Internet Browsers (e.g., Internet Explorer, 

Firefox, Mozilla, etc.), and PHP server. 

 Software: Windows 2007, UNIX, Pipeline e-mail, Web authoring software, 

PowerPoint, Word Objects, PHP, AJAX, Visual BASIC.Net. These packages 

may change from semester to semester. 

These products may change from semester to semester. 




