            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

 

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 

 

CSIT 296H Computer Science Capstone Research Honors 

 

 

I. Basic Course Information 

 

A. Course Number and Title: Computer Science Capstone Research Honors 
CSIT 296H 


 

B. New or Modified Course: New 

 

C. Date of Proposal: Semester: Fall Year: 2017 

 

D. Effective Term: Fall 2018 

 

E. Sponsoring Department: Computer Science 

 

F. Semester Credit Hours: 3 

 

G. Weekly Contact Hours: Lecture: 0 

 Laboratory: 0 

 Out of class student work per week: 9 

 

H. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Student must be enrolled in his or her last Honors 
College academic year before graduation 

 

I. Laboratory Fees: none 

 

J. Name and Telephone Number or E-Mail Address of Department Chair and Divisional 
Dean at time of approval: Steven Schwarz – steven.schwarz@raritanval.edu (Chair), 
Sarah Imbriglio – Sarah.Imbriglio@raritanval.edu (Divisional Dean) 

 

 

II. Catalog Description 

 

Prerequisite: Student must be enrolled in his or her last Honors College academic 
year before graduation 

 

The course is intended to guide sophomore Honors College students from all disciplines 
through the stages of conducting a semester-long research project and/or developing an 
artistic pursuit. Topics include planning, research and documentation, prose style and 
editing, document design, ethics, abstracts, and oral presentations. Because the course 


will enroll from different disciplines students will also become acquainted with research 
topics, ways of framing arguments, and making points outside their fields of study, which 
will help them develop a more interdisciplinary perspective. Class will include research 
training, developing a timeline, as well as independent study of research. 

 

 

III. Statement of Course Need 

 

A. Research on the value of intensive undergraduate research experiences abounds, and 
requiring enrollment in this research capstone will provide RVCC Honors College 
students with: a strong student-faculty collaboration and scholarship; an original 
research in the discipline; an understanding of intensive research in preparation for 
classes in the major or for more intensive graduate school research; and a high profile 
project that will aid in transfer applications. 


 

Class will consist of five major components: library instruction, research and 
guidance with faculty member, group discussions on topics and progress, the final 
written (or artistic) project, and a formal presentation. 

 

B. This course has no lab component 


 

C. This course is not designed for transfer, yet dependent on transfer institution may 
transfer as a Computer Science program elective. 


 

 

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

 

A. Free Elective 
B. This course does not meet a General Education requirement 
C. This course meets a program requirement for the Honors College 
D. CIS Elective on the Computer Science Elective List 
E. To see course transferability: a) for New Jersey schools, go to the NJ Transfer 
website, www.njtransfer.org; b) for all other colleges and universities, go to the 
individual websites. 


 

V. Outline of Course Content 

 

Class will consist of the following major components 

A. Information literacy instruction to support research in Computer Science 
B. Advanced Computer Science topic exploration 
C. Literature research utilizing discipline-specific information sources, databases, 
interlibrary loan, etc. 
D. Background research and discussion of the capstone topic with capstone Computer 
Science faculty advisor to create a timeline of completion 
E. Develop methods to understand and analyze the Computer Science research topic 
F. Application of Computer Science research topic and results to relevant situations 



G. Research and guidance with capstone Computer Science faculty advisor via weekly 
consultations to discuss results, assess progress and adjust timeline as needed. 
H. The final Computer Science capstone project 
I. A formal capstone presentation (Capstone Day). 


 

 

VI. General Education and Course Learning Outcomes 

 

 

 

A. General Education Learning Outcomes: 


 

 At the completion of the course, students will be able to: 

1. Logically and persuasively state and support orally and in writing their findings 
from the research or creative project (GE-NJ1, *) 
2. Evaluate relevance and authority of information (GE-NJ IL) 
3. Create and revise drafts and/or review artistic process to address capstone 
objectives and employ standard appropriate editing practices for the specified 
discipline (GE-NJ1) 
4. Use discipline-specific information sources and/or databases to better understand 
the research topic and find existing research in the field. (GE-NJ IL) 
5. Complete a research project or develop an artistic product that incorporates newly 
acquired and prior information and is delivered in a medium appropriate to the 
discipline and intended audience. (GE-NJ Il, NJ1) 
6. Cite sources, compile a bibliography, and make consistent and correct use of a 
citation style appropriate to the discipline (GE-NJ IL) 


* embedded critical thinking 

 B. Course Learning Outcomes: 

 

 At the completion of the course, students will be able to: 

1. Explain and present all aspects of their Computer Science capstone project 


 

 C. Assessment Instruments 

 

1. Research process 
2. Final capstone product 
3. Capstone project presentation 


 

 

VII. Grade Determinants 

 

A. research process 
B. completion of agreed upon timeline deadlines 



C. revisions of drafts and/or review of artistic process 
D. final capstone product oral presentation 


 

 

Given the goals and outcomes described above, the primary formats, modes, and methods 
for teaching and learning that may be used in the course: 

A. lecture/discussion 
B. small-group work 
C. computer-assisted instruction 
D. guest speakers and lectures 
E. student oral presentations 
F. student-faculty collaboration 
G. independent study and research 


 

 

VIII. Texts and Materials 

 

Any texts and materials will be dependent upon individual capstone project requirements. 

 

 

IX. Resources 

 

A. Databases 
B. Archives 
C. Museums/performances 
D. Subject matter experts 
E. Additional hardware/software might be acquired through a budget request process 


 


