            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Raritan Valley Community College



Outline for Course Proposals (New and Revised)



I. Basic Course Information



A. Course Number and Title:HITC-210

Health Data Reporting  Analysis



B. Date of Proposal:March 2006



C. Sponsoring Department: Health Science Education



D. Semester Credit Hours:3



E.  Weekly Contact Hours:Lecture:  2 hours

Lab:  2 hours



F.  Prerequisites:MATH-222 (Statistics I)

HITC 111 (Professional Practicum I)



Co-requisite:HITC-220 (Organizational Resource 

Management)



G. Laboratory Fees: Yes



H. Dept. Chair:Dr. Helen Jones (hjonesraritanval.edu)



II.  Catalog Description



Prerequisites:MATH-222 (Statistics I)

HITC-111 (Professional Practicum I)

Co-requisite:HITC-220 (Organizational Resource Management)



This course covers maintenance, compilation, analysis, and presentation of 
health 

care statistics. Discussion is focused on the use, collection, presentation, 
and 

verification of health care data including fundamental concepts of 
descriptive 

statistics data validity and reliability data presentation techniques and 
vital 

statistics.  Students will be introduced to topics such as basic statistical 
principles, 

morbidity and mortality, commonly computed hospital rates, uniform reporting 

requirements, and selection and construction of data displays. This course 
also 

introduces principles of quality improvement, utilization management, and 
risk 

management in health care. Topics include the continuous quality improvement 

philosophy, including tools, data analysis/application, and related 
committee 

functions utilization management and risk management and credentialing, 

accreditation and regulation.







III. Statement of Course Need



This course fulfills the knowledge cluster content and competency required 
by 

the American Health Information Management Association.  Earning a 
credential 

validates ones competence as a professional in the health information 

management industry to employers and the public. This credential requires an 

associates degree and successful performance on the RHIT certification exam. 

Students must successfully complete and meet the learning objectives as 
defined 

for this course in order to qualify to take the national certification 
examination. 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum



This course meets a requirement in the proposed four-semester Health 

Information Technology A.A.S. degree program. 



V. Outline of Course Content



1.Introduction to quality management in healthcare organizations

2.Performance Improvement (PI) Organization and Teams

3.PI methods, tools and techniques

4.PI application and reporting Project Instructions

5.Risk Management Patient Safety Infection Control

6.Case Management

7.Utilization Review

8.Legal Introduction

9.Mathematics Review

10.Basic Research Principles

11.Patient Census Data

12.Occupancy Ratio

13.Length of Stay (LOS)

14.Mortality Rates

15.Autopsies Rates

16.Morbidity/Mortality

17.HIMData Presentation



VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes





Educational Goals



The student will develop an awareness of the importance of healthcare 

statistics, research, and quality management and performance improvement 

as it relates to the healthcare arena:



1.Abstract and maintain data for clinical indices/databases/registries.  

(G.E.3, 7)

2.Collect, organize, and present data for quality management, utilization 

management, risk management, and other related studies. (G.E.3)

3.Compute and interpret healthcare statistics. (G.E.1, 7)

4.Apply Institutional Review Board (IRB) processes and policies. (G.E.1, 3, 

5)

5.Use specialized databases to meet specific organization needs such as 

medical research and disease registries. (G.E.3, 7)

6.Abstract and report data for facility-wide quality management and 

performance improvement programs. (G.E.2, 3)

7.Analyze clinical data to identify trends that demonstrate quality, safety, 

and effectiveness of healthcare. (G.E.1, 3, 7)



Learning Outcomes



The student will be able to:

1.Compute health care statistics, including mortality and morbidity rates, 

autopsy rates, measures of central tendency, and dispersion, and determine 
the 

most appropriate use of these health care statistics in health information 

management.

2.Organize data generated from health care statistics into appropriate 
categories, 

including nominal, ordinal, discrete, and continuous.

3.Display data generated from health care statistics using the most 
appropriate 

tables, graphs,  and figures, including frequency tables, bar graphs, 

histograms, Pareto diagrams, pie charts, and frequency diagrams.

4.Identify which tests of significance should be used to test specific 
hypotheses 

and which are most appropriate for certain types of data.

5.Define, compare, and contrast data and information.

6.Evaluate and describe the major users of health care data and the 
importance 

of addressing the needs of Identify the steps in the management decision-

making process with particular attention to step two of data collection.

7.Describe the importance of quality data and the mechanisms and controls 
used 

to ensure quality.

8.Identify the major information and data sets, their scope, and special 
features. 

9.Identify the primary components of healthcare quality management.

10.Describe the common component of a healthcare facilitys QA/QI program.

11.Identify the types of healthcare performance measurements.

12.Describe various methods for assessing and improving performance.

13.Summarize the steps of an improvement project.

14.Identify common performance improvement tools.

15.Describe the function of data based decision making in quality management 

processes.

16.Identify techniques of brainstorming, flowcharting, nominal group, and 
force 

field analysis used in problem identification and analysis.

17.Describe how QM principles apply to utilization management.

18.Describe how QM principles are applied to risk management.

19.Discuss legal and ethical issues associated with implementation of 
Quality 

Management processes.

20.Interpret and describe the purposes and techniques related to clinical 
reviews, 

including health record committees, clinical pertinence and indicator 

monitoring.

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning



lecture/discussion  

small-group work

computer-assisted instruction

student collaboration

independent study



VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments

Quizzes

Exams

Projects

Assignments

Participation

IX. Grade Determinants 

Unit Tests and Quizzes

Tests and quizzes will be comprised of multiple choice and true/false.  The 
test 

questions are developed to engage students in problem-solving and critical 

thinking skills.  Application skills will also be developed.

Test  1  Quality Improvement  

Test  2 Statistical Formulation

Weekly Quizzes will be based on the material covered 

Grading will be assigned based on the number of correct answers.

TERM PROJECTS:  (30 of the final grade will consist of two projects)

 Each student will be required to complete a term project for each portion 
of 

this course.

       Project 1 Quality Improvement

Students will be required to complete a case study relating to a topic in 
Health 

Information Management utilizing the PDSA methodology.  Detailed 

instructions will be provided.

The final project will include a completion of assigned template forms and 

written presentation of the following elements.   (Power Point Presentation 
in 

lieu of written report  is optional, must include notes, and assigned 
template 

forms still must be submitted.)

1.      Plan

        Identify a process improvement opportunity

        Brainstorm and prioritize utilizing an appropriate tool.

        Select Study Population

        Select Sample Size and Technique

        Identify benchmarks

2.      Do

        Identify Data Elements

        Design Collection Tool

        Organize Data

  

3.      Study

        Display and Report Data 

        Analyze Data

        Make recommendations

4.      Act

        Establish Guidelines/Processes

        Develop Performance Measure



Project 1 Healthcare Statistics

Each student will be assigned a healthcare statistics topic covered in the 
course. 

An Internet search will be conducted with the following expectations: 

1.At least two (2) web sites will be given to you to view.

2.A written report will be completed comparing and contrasting the 

types of data available.

3.At least two (2) graphs will be prepared utilizing data from each 

web site.

4.A written report will be required.

                  The project will be graded on the following:

a.      Correct conclusions drawn from review of healthcare 

statistics.

b.       Graphic display of raw data in appropriate format.

c.      Strength of written presentation. (Power Point Presentation 

is optional, must include notes)

 Final Project Grade:  Both Projects will be evaluated and graded utilizing 
the 

following criteria:

1.   To achieve 50 of the project grade, the student must demonstrate 

completion of ALL criteria listed in project overview.

2.   To achieve 25 of the project grade, the content will be presented 

in a sequential, logical manner conducive to explanation of topic.

4.   To achieve 25 of the project grade, the student must select the 

most appropriate PI tool and demonstrate competency in generating 

graph/chart that is most relative to displaying the data in a logical 

manner. 

HOMEWORK/LAB ASSIGNMENTS: (10 of final grade)

      Homework/Lab assignments will consist of various techniques to measure 
the 

competencies in the understanding of the functions, roles, and outcomes of 

performance requirements in the collection, analysis, and displaying of 
health 

information data.  Each unit will provide various projects that will be 

averaged into the overall lab grade.  Directed practice principals will be 

applied as frequently as possible.  Labs must be completed and turned in one 

week following receipt of the assignment.  Those not turned in will carry a 

zero weight in the calculation of the lab portion of the grade.

CLASS PARTICIPATION (10 of final grade)

FINAL EXAMINATION (20 of final grade and will be cumulative of both 

sections)

       Final examination will be comprised of multiple-choice, 
fill-in-the-blanks, 

true/false, and short essay.  Final Examination questions will be cumulative 
of 

all units during the semester.  Questions will be developed to engage 
student 

in problem-solving, critical thinking, and overall application skills.

      Final grade will be based on the number of correct answers.

Final Grade:

1.UNIT Tests (2 Unit Tests comprising 20 of final grade)

2.Weekly Checkpoint Quizzes (6 quizzes comprising 10 of final grade)

3.Two Projects (1 Quality Improvement 1 Statistics comprising 30 of grade)

4.Homework Assignments (comprising 10 of grade)

5.Class Participation (online discussions for QI section 10 of grade)

6.Final Exam (comprising 20 of grade)

X.  Texts and Materials

REQUIRED:



Calculating  Reporting Healthcare Statistics, Horton, Loretta A., 2004, 

American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA)  

Quality and Performance Improvement in Healthcare, A Tool for Programmed 

Learning, Shaw, et al, 2003, American Health Information Management 

Association

XI. Resources



The RVCC library resources and the resources in the Department of Health 

Science Learning Lab provide the materials and resources needed for this 
course. 
