            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

 

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 

 

MATH 151 H CALCULUS I HONORS 

 

I. Basic Course Information 

 

A. Course Number and Title: Math 151H Calculus I Honors 

 

B. New or Modified Course: New 

 

C. Date of Proposal: Semester: Fall Year: 2010 

 

D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics Department 

 

E. Semester Credit Hours: 4 

 

F. Weekly Contact Hours: 5 Lecture: 3 

 Laboratory: 2 


G. Prerequisites: GPA of 3.5 or permission of the instructor. 
Three-and-one-half years of college 
preparatory mathematics including 
Trigonometry and a satisfactory score on a 
placement test, or MATH 113 Precalculus 
II, or MATH 114H Precalculus Honors 

 Corequisites: None 


H. Laboratory Fees: None 

 

I. Name and Telephone Number or E-Mail Address of Department Chair: 
Patricia Hulsen (908) 526-1200 extension 8542 phulsen@raritanval.edu 

 

II. Catalog Description 

. 

 Prerequisite: GPA of 3.5 or permission of the instructor. Three-and-one-half 
years of college preparatory mathematics including Trigonometry and a 
satisfactory score on a placement test, or MATH 113 Precalculus II, or MATH 
114H Precalculus Honors. Introductory calculus with a technology-based 
computer laboratory component. Topics include limits, differentiation, 
applications of derivatives, integration, the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, 
and logarithmic, exponential, and other transcendental functions as well as the 
Binomial Theorem and Mathematical Induction. Calculus application problems 
from business, the natural sciences and mathematics 

 


III. Statement of Course Need 

 

This course is a prerequisite for MATH 152 Calculus II. This course also serves 
as a math requirement for programs in Biology, Computer Science, Engineering 
Science, General Science, Mathematics and the Honors College Program. 

 

Honors courses in mathematics have been developed to provide mathematically 
talented students the opportunity to obtain a level of rigor above the level 
currently available in existing courses. 

 

 

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

 

A. This course is a free elective. 
B. This course serves as a General Education requirement in Mathematics. 
C. This course meets a program requirement in Biology, Computer Science, 
Engineering Science, General Science, Mathematics and in the Honors 
College Program 
D. This course transfers as a first semester honors calculus course. For Course 
transferability; for New Jersey schools go to the NJ Transfer website, 
www.njtransfer.org. For all other colleges and universities go to their 
individual websites. 


 

V. Outline of Course Content 

 

 A. Limits and their properties 

 1. Preview 

 2. Finding limits graphically, numerically, and analytically 

 3. Continuity and one-sided limits 

 4. Infinite limits 

 

 B. Differentiation 

 1. The derivative and the tangent line problem 

 2. Basic Differentiation rules and rates of change 

 3. Product rule, quotient rule, higher-order derivatives 

 4. Chain rule 

 5. Implicit differentiation 

 6. Related rates 

 

 C. Applications of differentiation 

 1. Extrema 

 2. Rolle's Theorem, mean value theorem 

 3. Increasing and decreasing functions and the first derivative test 

 4. Concavity and the second derivative test 

 5. Limits at infinity 

 6. Summary of curve sketching 


 7. Optimization problems 

 8. Newton's method, differentials 


 D. Integration 

 1. Antiderivatives and indefinite integration 

 2. Area, Riemann sums, and definite integrals 

 3. Fundamental theorem of calculus 

 4. Integration by substitution; numerical integration 

 


 E. Logarithmic, exponential, and other transcendental functions 

 1. Natural logarithmic functions: differentiation, integration 

 2. Inverse functions 

 3. Exponential functions: differentiation, integration 

 4. Bases other than e and their applications 

 5. Differential equations: growth and decay, separation of variables 

 6. Inverse trigonometric functions: differentiation and integration 

 7. Hyperbolic functions 


F. Enrichment and proofs 
1. Selected proofs appropriate to the level of the course 
2. Mathematical Induction 
3. The Binomial Theorem 

 

 G. Applications problems 
1. Business applications, 

 2. Engineering applications 

 3. Natural science applications 
H. Instruction in the computer algebra software designated for Calculus Labs 

 


VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

 

A. Educational Goals 


 

Learn and use the language, symbols, logical reasoning skills and analytic tools in 
Mathematics to solve with appropriate use of technology, modeling problems about rates 
of change and accumulated change and their applications in business, mathematics and 
the natural sciences 

 

 
Students will: 

 1. apply mathematical arguments to problems. (GE - NJ 2) 

 2. solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (GE - NJ 2) 


 


B. Learning Outcomes 

 

 Students will be able to: 

 

1. Utilize the concept of instantaneous rate of change or accumulated 
change to solve application problems in business engineering or 
the natural sciences 

 2. Differentiate polynomial, rational, exponential, logarithmic, 
and trigonometric functions algebraically. 

 3. Demonstrate the relationship between the algebraic and geometric 
properties of the derivative. 

 4. Use the concept of antiderivative to algebraically evaluate integrals 
involving simple substitutions. 

5. Demonstrate the relationship between differentiation and 
integration using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. 

 6. Apply the derivative procedure to optimization problems. 

 7. Prove selected theorems appropriate to the level of the course. 

 8. Demonstrate proficiency in the computer algebra software 
designated for calculus labs. 

 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

 

A. lecture 
B. labs with technology component 
C. projects 
D. homework 
E. small groups 
F. quizzes 
G. tests 
H. Cumulative Final Exam 


 

 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

 

A. tests 
B. final examination 
C. projects 
D. laboratory reports 
E. quizzes 


 

IX. Grade Determinants 

 

A. tests 

B. labs 

C. quizzes 

D. projects 


E. cumulative final examination 

F. individual teacher determinant 

 

 

 

X. Texts and Materials 

 

The following text and materials are required for the course: 

A. Suggested Textbook: Single Variable Calculus, Early Transcendentals, 
latest ed., by James Stewart, Thomson, Brooks/Cole. 
Graphing calculator may be required. TI-84 is recommended. 


 

Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course content and 
resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC Bookstore 
is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 

 

 

XI. Resources 

 

This course is held in a computer lab for two hours a week. The computers need 
to be installed with the math software currently licensed to the math department. 
Contact the math department to determine which software to install. 

 

 

 


