            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

MATH 124H Mathematical Thinking (proposed) 

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 


MATH 124H MATHEMATICAL THINKING – HONORS 


I. Basic Course Information 
A. Course Number and Title: MATH 124H Mathematical Thinking - Honors 
B. New or Modified Course: Modified 
C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2008 
D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 
E. Semester Credit Hours: 1 
F. Weekly Contact Hours: 1 Lecture: 1 
Laboratory: 0 
G. Prerequisite or Corequisite: MATH 150 Applied Calculus 
or MATH 151 Calculus 
H. Laboratory Fees: None 

I. Department Chair: Siham Alfred, salfred@raritanval.edu 
II. Catalog Description 
Prerequisite or Corequisite: MATH 150 Applied Calculus or MATH 151 
Calculus I. This course is designed to introduce students to the techniques of 
understanding and writing mathematical proof. Emphasis is on analyzing and 
writing proofs. Problems from a variety of mathematical areas are considered. 
Topics include set notation and operations, proof techniques, and induction. 

III. Statement of Course Need 
Honors courses in mathematics have been developed to provide mathematically 
talented students the opportunity to obtain a level of rigor not currently available 
in existing courses. The concept of mathematical proof is fundamental to all areas 
of mathematics, but is not stressed in any of the currently-offered courses. The 
ability to understand the underlying logic in proof requires effective mathematical 
communication. This course will introduce the student to both the language and 
the logic used by mathematicians to work through problems that cannot be solved 
by simply substituting numbers into a template. 

OAA/je 1 

4/2/2008 


MATH 124H Mathematical Thinking (proposed) 

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 
A. This course serves as a one credit free math elective for all programs. 
B. This course serves as an Honors program math course. 
C. This course transfers as a math course in most liberal arts programs. 
V. Outline of Course Content 
A. Forward-backward method 
B. Definitions and terminology 
C. Quantifiers, Construction method 
D. Quantifiers, Choose method 
E. Quantifiers, Specialization 
F. Nested Quantifiers 
G. Contradiction Method 
H. Contrapositive Method 
I. Induction 
VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 
A. Educational Goals 
Students will: 

1. apply mathematical arguments to problems. (G. E. 1) 
2. solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (G. E. 7) 
B. 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to: 

1. 
Use the different methods of proof to prove a mathematical statement. 
2. 
Manipulate quantified statements following the rules of mathematical 
logic. 
3. 
Translate a written statement into its mathematical form using 
appropriate quantifiers. 
VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 
The following are appropriate to the course and may be included: 

A. Lecture/discussion 
B. Small-group work 
C. Computer assisted instruction 
D. Student oral presentations 
E. Student Collaboration 
F. 
Independent study 
OAA/je 
2 

4/2/2008 


MATH 124H Mathematical Thinking (proposed) 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 
A. Tests 
B. Quizzes 
C. Homework 
D. Final Examination 
E. Essays 
F. 
Oral Presentations 
IX. Grade Determinants 
A. Tests 
B. 
Quizzes 
C. Projects 
D. 
Laboratory products 
E. 
Homework 
F. Final exam 
X. 
Texts and Materials 
Suggested Textbook: Mathematical Proofs: a Transition to Advanced 
Mathematics, 2nd edition, by Gary Chartrand, Albert D. Polimeni and Ping Zhang, 
Pearson-Addison Wesley, 2008 

Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course content and 
resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC Bookstore 
is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 

XI. Resources 
No additional resources are needed. 

XII. Honors Course 
A. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes: 
See detailed Educational Goals 
and Student Learning Outcomes in Section VI. 
B. Honors Content: 
Mathematical Thinking deals with the subject of 
mathematical proof. While it is always present in other math courses, formal 
proof is not usually emphasized. A typical course in mathematical proof is 
usually offered to mathematics majors at the junior-year level. This course 
introduces the calculus student to the fundamentals of proof and gives them 
experience in creating their own formal proofs of mathematical statements. 
C. Grade Determinants for Honors Work: See Section IX. 
OAA/je 
3 

4/2/2008 


