            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA  MATH 030 





RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 





MATH-030 Intermediate Algebra 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH-030 Intermediate Algebra 

B. Date of Proposal or Revision: October, 1997 updated Spring 2001 

updated Fall 2006 

C. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

D. Semester Credit Hours: 4 NC 

E. Weekly Contact Hours: 4 

F. Prerequisites: MATH-020 Elementary Algebra 

or equivalent course, or 

satisfactory score on placement test 

G. Laboratory Fees: None 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite: MATH-020 Elementary Algebra (no longer offered) or equivalent 
course 

or a satisfactory score on placement test. This course is for the student 
whose high 

school preparation in Algebra or placement score indicate insufficient 
knowledge or skill 

for success in college courses which require mathematics. The course meets 
four hours 

each week three hours in a lecture setting and one hour in guided study 
sessions. The 

topics include solving linear and quadratic equations and inequalities, 
graphing linear and 

quadratic equations, rational and radical expressions, integer and rational 
exponents, 

absolute value equations, and systems of linear equations. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

This course is designed for students who demonstrate a minimal level of 
proficiency in 

algebra but do not have the algebraic skills necessary to succeed in a 
college-level math 

course as determined by performance on the college placement test(s) in 
basic algebra. 

This course is designed for students in AA, AS, and some AAS programs who 
only need 

one semester of algebra remediation before entering college-level work. 
Students in 

AAS programs that do not require mathematics are not required to take this 
course. 



11/5/2007 Page 1 of 4 





INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA  MATH 030 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

This is a developmental course and carries no college credit. 



V. Outline of Course Content 

A. Basic Concepts 

1. Real numbers 

2. Powers, square roots, order of operations 

3. Exponents, scientific notation 

4. Variable expressions 

B. Linear Equations and Inequalities 

1. First-degree equations with one unknown formulas 

2. Absolute value equations 

3. Word problems 

4. Linear inequalities 

5. Compound inequalities absolute value inequalities 

C. Equations and Inequalities in Two Variables and Functions 

1. Graphing 

2. Slope equations of a line 

3. Linear inequalities in two variables 

4. Function graphing functions 

D. Systems of Linear Equations and Inequalities 

1. Systems in two variables 

2. Systems in three variables 

3. Applications 

4. Systems of linear inequalities 

E. Polynomials 

1. Addition, subtraction, multiplication, division 

2. Common factors factoring by grouping 

3. Factoring trinomials 

4. Special cases of factoring factoring a polynomial completely 

5. Solving equations 

F. Rational Expressions and Equations 

1. Simplifying, multiplying, and dividing 

2. Adding and subtracting 

3. Complex rational expressions 

4. Rational equations applications 

G. Rational Exponents and Radicals 

1. Exponents radical expressions 

2. Simplifying, adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing radicals 

11/5/2007 Page 2 of 4 



INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA  MATH 030 





3. Radical equations 

4. Complex numbers 

5. Variation 

H. Quadratic Equations and Inequalities 

1. Equations 

2. Quadratic formula 

3. Equations transformed into quadratic form 

4. Formulas, applications, quadratic functions 

5. Quadratic Inequalities in one variable 

I. Conic Sections 

1. Distance formula and circle 

2. Parabola 

VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

The student will develop and strengthen the algebraic skills necessary to 
succeed in a 

college-level mathematics course. The student will also study the 
relationships between 

variable quantities from three perspectives  the symbolic (algebraic), the 
graphical 

(geometric), and the numerical (empirical). 



Student Learning Outcomes 



The student will be able to: 



1. Solve linear and quadratic equations and inequalities. 

2. Graph linear and quadratic equations in two variables. 

3. Develop the equation of lines in standard form, point/slope form, and 

slope/intercept form. 

4. Solve systems of linear equations and inequalities. 

5. Solve rational and radical equations. 

6. Perform operations on polynomial-based expressions, expressions that 
contain 

integer and rational exponents, and rational and radical expressions. 

7. Solve application problems that give rise to linear, quadratic, rational 
or radical 

equations. 

General Education Goals 



This course addresses the following RVCC General Education Goals: 



 Students will be able to produce works that demonstrate their ability to 
move 

from the specific to the general, think abstractly about a situation, and 
reconcile 

three different perspectives (symbolic, graphical, and numerical) into a 

connected whole. (Gen. Ed. Goal 1) 

 Students will be able to demonstrate their ability reason quantitatively 
and 

symbolically to solve problems. (Gen. Ed. Goal 7) 

11/5/2007 Page 3 of 4 





INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA  MATH 030 



VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

 lecture/discussion 

 small-group work 

 laboratory 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

 tests, quizzes, final examination 

 laboratory products 

 other 

IX. Grade Determinants 

 Cumulative departmental final exam 

 Tests 

 Lab assignments 

 other determinants (such as possible quizzes). 

The final exam will assess all the course outcomes listed above in Section 
VI. 



X. Texts and Materials 

 textbook: Intermediate Algebra, 4th edition, 2002, by Tobey and Slater 
Houghton 

Mifflin, ISBN 0-13-032837-5 

 guided study materials for lab hour, supplied by Math. Dept. 

XI. Resources 

No unusual resources are needed. 



11/5/2007 Page 4 of 4 




