            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 

 

MATH 117H STATISTICS HONORS 

 

 

I. Basic Course Information 

 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 117H Statistics Honors 

 

B. New or Modified Course: Modified Course 

 

C. Date of Proposal: Fall 2012 

 

D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

 

E. Semester Credit Hours: 4 

 

F. Weekly Contact Hours: 5 Lecture: 3 

 Laboratory: 2 

 

G. Prerequisites: GPA of 3.5 or permission of the instructor. 

MATH 030 Intermediate Algebra, or 

appropriate score on math placement test 

 

H. Laboratory Fees: No 

 

I. Department Chair: Professor Rosemarie Gorini, rgorini@raritanval.edu 

 

II. Catalog Description 

 

Prerequisites: GPA of 3.5 or permission of the instructor and MATH 030 
Intermediate Algebra, or appropriate score on math placement test. This is an 
honors course combining the material in both Math 110 Statistics I and Math 111 
Statistics II, as well as topics of Experimental Design. This course introduces the 
student to the methods and uses of statistical research. Topics include descriptive 
displays and analysis, classical probability, the normal distribution, the sampling 
distribution of the mean, inferences concerning means, critical values, and p-values 
(Statistics I). Other topics include description and analysis of bivariate data, 
regression and correlation, inferences in regression, chi-square procedures, 
inferences in two means and proportions, simple experimental design, analysis of 
variance, and optional non-parametric tests (Statistics II). Experimental Design 
topics include randomized block designs, two-way factorial experiments, repeated 
measures, relationship between ANOVA and regression, two-stage nested designs, 
and estimation based on nested sampling. 

 

 


III. Statement of Course Need 

 

A. This course is a general education mathematics course and serves as a math requirement 
for various A.S. and A.A. programs. 

 

B. Honors courses in mathematics have been developed to provide mathematically talented 
students the opportunity to obtain a level of rigor not currently available in existing courses. 

C. This course will generally transfer as a Mathematics or Statistics course. 

 

D. A one hour lab component would benefit Statistics Honors because four hours a week is 
tight for course content that is more than double that of Statistics I or II alone. The extra lab 
hour would allow spiraling the content to be implemented as well as time to apply and 
incorporate the content with its use for statistical analysis. 

 

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

 

A. This course serves as a free elective. 
B. This course serves as a General Education course in Mathematics. 
C. This course meets a program requirement for Statistics for the following programs: AS 
Biology, AS Biotechnology, AA Business Liberal Arts, AS Environmental Science, AS 
General Science, AAS Health Information Technology, AS Health Science, AS Human 
Services/Pre Social Work, AS Occupational Health Assistant, AAS Accounting, AAS 
Accounting Information Systems, AAS Marketing 
D. To see course transferability: a) for New Jersey schools, go to the NJ Transfer website, 
www.njtransfer.org; for all other colleges and universities, go to the individual websites. 
E. This course is an honors course. 


 

V. Outline of Course Content 

 

A. The Nature of Statistics 
B. Organizing Data 


1. Sampling Techniques 

2. Grouping Data 

3. Histograms and other graphs 

4. Stem and Leaf Diagrams 

C. Descriptive Measures for Univariate Data 
1. Summation Notation 
2. Measures of Central Tendency 
3. Measure of Dispersion 
4. Interpretation of Standard Deviation and Chebychev’s theorem 
5. Grouped Data Formulas 
6. Quartiles and Box-and-Whisker Diagrams 
7. Parameters and Statistics 


D. Probability 

1. Classical Probability 
2. Rules of Probability 



3. Mutually Exclusive Events 
4. Conditional Probability 
5. Independent Events 
E. Discrete Random Variables 
1. Probability Distributions 
2. The Mean and Standard Deviation of Discrete Random Variables 
3. Bernoulli Trials and Binomial Coefficients 
4. The Binomial Distribution 
F. The Normal Distribution 
1. From Discrete to Continuous Random Variables 
2. The Standard Normal Curve 
3. Finding Areas Under the Normal Curve 
4. Normally Distributed Random Variables 
G. The Sampling Distribution of the Mean 
1. Random Sample and Sampling Error 
2. The Mean and Standard Deviation of the Sample Mean 
3. The Central Limit Theorem 
H. Estimation 
1. Point and Interval Estimation of a Parameter 
2. Constructing Confidence intervals for Population Means 
3. The t-Distribution 
4. Sample Size Considerations 
I. Hypothesis Testing – Statistical Inference 


1. Nature and Design of Hypothesis Tests – classical and p-value 
methods 

2. Tests for Single Means and Single Proportions 
3. Interpretation of Results 
4. Type I and Type II Errors 
5. Power analysis 
J. Inferences About Two Population Means 
1. Independent and Dependent Samples 
2. Tests for Differences between Two Means 
3. Tests for Differences between Two Proportions 
4. Tests for standard deviations 
5. Chi-square procedures 




K. Inferences About More Than Two Population Means 
1. The F-Distribution 
2. The Logic behind Analysis of Variance 
3. One-Way ANOVA 
4. Two-Way ANOVA 
5. Randomized blocks 
6. Two-way factorial experiments 
7. Repeated measures 




L. Descriptive Measures for Bivariate Data 
1. Scatter plots 
2. Linear Equations with One Independent Variable 
3. The Regression Equation 
4. The Correlation Coefficient 







5. The Coefficient of Determination 




M. Inferences for Regression and Correlation 
1. Standard Error of the Estimate 
2. Inferences for Regression and Correlation Coefficients 
3. The model for Multiple Regression 
4. The relationship between ANOVA and regression 




N. Nested Sampling 
1. Two-stage nested designs 
2. Estimating a population mean based on nested sampling 






 

VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

A. General Education Learning Outcomes: 

1. Synthesize descriptive methods of statistics for the purpose of organizing and 
summarizing data. (GE-NJ 2) 

2. Interpret the meaning of summary measures (mean, median, mode, standard 
deviation, variance, quartile, percentile, range, minimum, maximum, outlier, etc.) 
within the context of problem. (GE-NJ 2) 

3. Calculate the probability of an event using both discrete and normal distribution 
methods. (GE-NJ 2) 

4. Interpret results from inferential statistics to interpret data for the purposes of 
interval estimation in means and proportions. (GE-NJ 2) 

5. Interpret results from inferential statistics to interpret data for the purposes of 
decision-making in hypothesis tests, including independent or dependent means, and 
one or two proportions. (GE-NJ 2) 

6. Conduct an appropriate hypothesis test using both classical and modern (p-value) 
procedures. (GE-NJ 2) 

7. Interpret results from inferential statistics to interpret data for the purposes of 
decision-making in Chi-Square tests for independence or goodness-of fit. (GE-NJ 2) 

8. Interpret results from inferential statistics to interpret data for the purposes of 
decision-making for a one-way ANOVA analysis. (GE-NJ 2) 

9. Use linear regression techniques for purposes of analysis and prediction for slope 
or correlation. (GE-NJ 2) 

10. Conduct a simple statistical study (experimental or observational), including the 
sampling design, interpretation of computer results from their collected data, and 
inference from these results to a conclusion consistent with their design. (GE-NJ 2; 
GE-NJ IL) 

11. Explain and present (written and verbal) statistical results from own 
experimental design study. (GE-NJ 1) 

 

 

B. Course Learning Outcomes: 

All course outcomes included in general education goals, listed above. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

 

 Instructors can use a variety of modes including, but not limited to the following: 

A. lecture/discussion 
B. small-group work 
C. computer-assisted instruction 
D. student oral presentations 
E. student collaboration 
F. independent study 
G. homework 


 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

 

 Student learning outcomes are assessed using a combination of the following: 

A. teacher written tests 
B. computer/calculator assignments 
C. semester projects 
D. final examination 
E. in-class or online quizzes & homework 


 

IX. Grade Determinants 

 

Final grades are determined by a combination of the following: 

A. tests 
B. quizzes 
C. homework 
D. projects 
E. assignments 
F. cumulative final exam 


 

X. Texts and Materials 

 

A. Suggested textbook: Introductory Statistics, (latest edition). Neil A. Weiss. 
Pearson Addison-Wesley. 


B. Computer-based sources: The instructor is free to choose the type of technology. 
Choices include but are not limited to: 

1. MINITAB 
2. TI-84 graphing calculator 
3. EXCEL 
4. IBM SPSS 
5. SAS 


 

Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course content and 
resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC Bookstore is 
the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 

 

 


 

XI. Resources 

 

Because of the technology used in the course, classes should be held in a CATT 
room where the instructor can access both MINITAB and the web. MINITAB 
software needs to be available in S020, the open lab, and any other computer lab 
where students may be working. 

 

 


