            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Raritan Valley Community College 

Official Course Outline 





MATH 213H: INTRODUCTION TO LIMITS  HONORS 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 213H: Introduction to Limits  Honors 

B. Date: November 1996 updated Summer 2001, updated Fall 2002 

C. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

D. Semester Credit Hours: 1 

E. Weekly Contact Hours: 1 Lecture: 1 

Laboratory: 0 

F. Corequisite: MATH 112: Precalculus I, or 

MATH 113: Precalculus II, or 

MATH 211H: Foundations for Calculus 

G. Laboratory Fees: None

H. Dept. Chair: Dr. Nora Thornber (nthornberaritanval.edu) 

II. Catalog Description 

Corequisite: MATH 112: Precalculus I, or MATH 113: Precalculus II, or 

MATH 211H: Foundations for Calculus. This course is designed as an honors 

component to supplement existing courses at the precalculus level. The 
course is 

intended to provide students with exposure to relevant ideas for future 
courses in 

Calculus. Topics include intuitive concept of the limit of a function, 
introduction 

to the delta epsilon definition, limits at infinity, continuity, and the 
Intermediate 

Value Theorem. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

Honors courses in mathematics were developed to provide mathematically 

talented students the opportunity to obtain a level of rigor not currently 
available 

in existing courses. Topics in this course were selected to supplement and 
enrich 

the curriculum of precalculus courses by providing additional theory and 

applications of the fundamental concept of limit as it was used by Newton 
and 

Leibniz in the development of calculus. This course has been designed as an 

additional one credit component to the existing precalculus courses. 



02/19/03 Page 1 of 4 





MATH 213: Introduction to Limits 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

A. Introduction to Limits satisfies general education requirements in 

mathematics. It serves as one-credit of free elective in mathematics for all 

program. 

B. Introduction to Limits transfers as a mathematics course in most liberal 

arts programs. 

C. Introduction to Limits serves as one-credit of an honors elective in 

mathematics. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

A. Intuitive and Formal Definition of Limit 

B. Limits of Functions: Polynomials, Rational, Radical and Trigonometric. 

C. Multi-representation of Limits: Numerical, Graphical, and Algebraic 

D. One Sided Limits and Limits at Infinity 

E. Properties of Limits and their Proofs. 

F. Application of Limits: Continuity. 

VI. General Education Goals and Learning Outcomes 

1. Education Goal: 

The student will develop strategies to work with limits (relates to Gen. Ed. 

Goals 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.g.). 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 State and prove one or more properties of limits of functions. 

2. Education Goal: 

The student will develop the ability to apply analytic and geometric skills 

quantitatively to limit problems (relates to Gen. Ed. Goals 5.a. and 5.d.). 



Learning Outcomes: 



The student will be able to: 



2 11/25/02 







MATH 213: Introduction to Limits 



 Define the limit of a function at a point both intuitively and formally 

 Evaluate the limit of a polynomial, rational, radical and trigonometric 

function 

 Find the limit of a function numerically, graphically, and algebraically 

 Identify and evaluate one-sided limits, two sided limits, and limits at 

infinity 

 State the relationship between continuity and the limit of a function at 

a point. 

3. Education Goal: 

The student will develop strategies apply limit concepts to problems in 

selected areas of the sciences (relates to Gen. Ed. Goal 6.c.) 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Solve application problems that require the concept of a limit. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

The following are appropriate to the course and may be included 



 Lecture/discussion 

 Small-group work 

 Graphing Calculator assisted instruction 

 Students in class oral presentations 

 Student Collaboration 

 Independent study. 

VIII. Papers, Examinations and other Assessment Instruments 

Student Learning outcomes are assessed using a combination of the following: 



 Teacher written exams 

 In-Class quizzes 

 Labs and/or Projects 

 Student Oral Presentation 

 Final examination 

IX. Grade Determinants 

3 11/25/02 







MATH 213: Introduction to Limits 



Final grades are determined by a combination of tests, quizzes, projects, 
labs, 

homework, and a final exam. Individual instructors are free to use the above 
in 

any combination. 



X. Text and Materials 

Textbook: Precalculus with Limits, a Graphing Approach 3nd ed. Larson, 

R.E., Hostetler, R. P.,  Edwards, B. H. Houghton Mifflin, 2001 

Required technology: A scientific calculator is necessary. A graphing 

calculator is recommended. 

XI.. Resources 

No additional resources are needed. 



XII. Honors Course 

1. This is a one-credit honors course designed to supplement topics in 

Precalculus I, Precalculus II or Foundations of Calculus. 

2. See detailed Educational Goals and Student Learning Outcome in section 

VI 

3. This is an existing and approved honors course. Its content is at the 

precalculus level. 

4 11/25/02 






