            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 





MATH 251 CALCULUS III 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 251 Calculus III 

B. New or Modified Course: Modified Course 

C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2008 

D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

E. Semester Credit Hours: 4 

F. Weekly Contact Hours: 5 Lecture: 3 

Laboratory: 2 

G. Prerequisite: MATH 152 Calculus II 

H. Laboratory Fees: None 

I. Department Chair: Dr. Siham Alfred, salfredraritanval.edu 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite: MATH 152 Calculus II. Third semester of calculus with a 

technology-based computer laboratory. Topics include vectors, vector-valued 

functions, curves in space, functions of two or more variables, partial 

differentiation, multiple integrals, line integrals, Greens Theorem, 
Divergence 

Theorem, and Stokes Theorem. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

This course is required for programs in Engineering Science and Mathematics. 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

A. This course is a free elective and a Mathematics elective for all 
programs. 

B. This course serves as a General Education requirement in Mathematics. 

C. This course is required for programs Engineering Science and Mathematics. 

D. This course transfers as a third semester calculus course. 

1 





V. Outline of Course Content 

A. Vectors and the geometry of space 

1. Vectors, in the plane and in space 

2. Dot product and cross product of two vectors in space 

3. Line, planes, and surfaces in space 

4. Cylindrical and spherical coordinates 

B. Vector-Valued Functions 

1. Vector-valued functions, differentiation and integration 

2. Velocity and acceleration 

3. Tangent vectors and normal vectors 

4. Arc length and curvature 

C. Functions of Several Variables 

1. Limits, continuity, and partial derivatives 

2. Differentials chain rules 

3. Directional derivatives, gradients, tangent planes, and normal lines 

4. Extrema applications of extrema 

5. Lagrange multipliers 

D. Multiple integration 

1. Iterated integrals and area in the plane double integrals and 

volume 

2. Change of variables  polar coordinates 

3. Center of mass, moments of inertia, surface area 

4. Triple integrals: applications, cylindrical and spherical coordinates 

5. Jacobians 

E. Vector Analysis 

1. Vector fields and line integrals 

2. Conservative vector fields 

3. Greens theorem, parametric surfaces, surface integrals 

4. Divergence theorem, Stokes theorem 

VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

A. General Education Goals 

Students will: 



1. apply mathematical arguments to problems. (G. E. 1) 

2. solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (G. E. 7) 

B. Learning Outcomes 

2 





Students will be able to: 



1. compute with vectors in three-dimensional space 

2. differentiate functions of several variables, including graphing 

functions of two variables. 

3. evaluate multiple integrals 

4. utilize Greens Theorem to evaluate line integrals 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

A. tests 

B. quizzes 

C. cumulative final examination 

D. projects 

E. homework 

F. small groups 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

A. tests 

B. final examination 

C. projects 

D. laboratory products 

E. quizzes 

IX. Grade Determinants 

A. cumulative final examination 

B. tests 

C. projects 

D. individual teacher determinants 

X. Texts and Materials 

The following text and materials are required for the course: 



A. Suggested Textbook: Thomas Calculus, latest ed., by Weir, Hass, 

Giordano, Pearson Addison Wesley 

B. Graphing calculator may be required. TI-84 is recommended. 

Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course 
content and 

resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC 
Bookstore 

is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 



XI. Resources 

3 





This course is held in a computer lab for two hours a week. The computers 
need 

to be installed with the math software currently licensed to the math 
department. 

Contact the math department to determine which software to install. 



4 




