            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 


MATH 299 SPECIAL TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS 


I. Basic Course Information 
A. Course Number and Title: MATH 299 Special Topics in Mathematics 
B. New or Modified Course: New 
C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2010 
D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 
E. Semester Credit Hours: 3 
F. 
Weekly Contact Hours: 3 Lecture: 3 
Laboratory: 0 
G. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Permission of the instructor and one of the 
following: MATH 110 Statistics I or MATH 112 Precalculus I or appropriate 
math placement score. Additional prerequisites that are topic specific may apply. 
H. Laboratory Fees: None 
I. Name and Telephone Number or E-Mail Address of Department Chair: Patricia 
Hulsen (908) 526-1200 x 8542 or phulsen@raritanval.edu 
II. Catalog Description 
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor and one of the following: MATH 110 
Statistics I or MATH 112 Precalculus I or appropriate math placement score. 
Additional prerequisites that are topic specific may apply. The course provides an 
opportunity for students to study selected mathematical topics that are not covered 
in any other math courses offered at RVCC. The special topics in mathematics are 
defined by the instructor and vary from semester to semester. Since the special 
topics vary per semester and the description of the special topic is not in the 
course catalog, students can obtain the course description of the special topic from 
the course schedule per semester. 

III. Statement of Course Need 
The Special Topics in Mathematics allow students access to a focused 
mathematical study experience. Since each special topic will not be offered 
regularly, the course provides students a journey through a range of spotlighted 
study over a number of semesters. Each special topic will vary based on the 

OAA/je 
1 

6/4/2010 


direction of the instructor as well as approved by the Math Department. Special 
Topics in Mathematics is present in other colleges with established Mathematics 
departments. This course serves as a free elective, but is not designed to transfer 
to a four year college. 

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 
A. This course is a Free Elective for all programs. 
B. This course is not designed to transfer to a four year college. However, to 
check course transferability, go to the NJ Transfer website www.njtransfer.org 
or the websites of individual colleges and universities. 
V. Outline of Course Content 
Since the special topic varies per semester, the outline of the course content is 
intentionally brief and broad. Each special topic offered will be approved by the 
Math Department. 

A. Introduction to the topic 
B. Study and discussion of the topic as directed by the instructor 
C. Methods to understand and analyze the specified topic 
D. Ways to apply the specified topic to relevant situations. 
VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 
A. Educational Goals 
Students will: 

1. apply mathematical arguments to problems. (GE-RVCC 1; NJ 2) 
2. solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (GE-RVCC 7; NJ 4) 
B. Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to: 

1. explain the fundamental components of the topic. 
2. apply the theories of the topics to relevant situations. 
3. synthesize the selected topics in discussion and written work. 
VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 
Modes of teaching and learning depend on the special topic and may vary per special 
topic. 

A. lecture/discussion 
B. group work 
OAA/je 2 

6/4/2010 


C. computer-assisted instruction 
D. guest speakers 
E. laboratory 
F. student presentations 
G. student collaboration 
H. independent study 
VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 
Assessment methods depend on the special topic and may vary per special topic. 

A. laboratory products 
B. research papers 
C. projects 
D. presentations 
E. tests/final exam 
F. quizzes 
IX. Grade Determinants 
Grade determinants depend on the special topic and may vary per special topic. 

A. laboratory products 
B. research papers 
C. projects 
D. presentations 
E. tests/final exam 
F. quizzes 
X. Texts and Materials 
Required text and material depend on the special topic and may vary per special topic. 

A. suggested textbook 
B. math software 
C. calculator 
Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course content and 
resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC Bookstore is the 
sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 

XI. Resources 
Resources depend on the special topic and may vary per special topic. 

A. Library 
OAA/je 3 

6/4/2010 


B. Computer lab 
OAA/je 4 

6/4/2010 


