            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Raritan Valley Community College 

Official Course Outline 





MATH 212H: SUMMATIONS, SEQUENCES  SERIES  HONORS 



I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 212H: Summations, Sequences,  

Series  Honors 

B. Date: November 1996 updated Summer 2001, updated Fall 2002 

C. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

D. Semester Credit Hours: 1 

E. Weekly Contact Hours: 1 Lecture: 1 

Laboratory: 0 

F. Corequisite: MATH 112: Precalculus I, or 

MATH 113: Precalculus II, or 

MATH 211H: Foundations for Calculus 

G. Laboratory Fees: None

H. Dept. Chair: Dr. Nora Thornber (nthornberaritanval.edu) 

II. Catalogue Description: 

Corequisite: MATH 112: Precalculus I, or MATH 113: Precalculus II, or 

MATH 211H: Foundations for Calculus. This course is designed as an honors 

component to supplement existing courses at the precalculus level. The 
course is 

intended to provide students with exposure to relevant ideas for future 
courses in 

Calculus. Topics include arithmetic and geometric sequences and sums, 
infinite 

series, the binomial theorem, mathematical induction, permutations, 
combinations 

and probability. 



III. Statement of Course Need: 

Honors courses in mathematics have been developed to provide mathematically 

talented students the opportunity to obtain a level of rigor not currently 
available 

in existing courses. Topics in this course have been selected to supplement 
and 

enrich the curriculum of the co-requisite courses by providing additional 
theory 

and applications that will sharpen the students deductive and inductive 
reasoning 



02/19/03 Page 1 of 4 





MATH 212: Summations, Sequences,  Series 



skills and empower them with the tools of symbolic language and methods to 

acquire mathematical knowledge most needed for the calculus series. 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

A. Summations, Sequences,  Series satisfies general education requirements 

in mathematics. It serves as one-credit of free elective in mathematics for 

all programs. 

B. Summations, Sequences,  Series transfers as a mathematics course in 

most liberal arts programs. 

C. Summations, Sequences,  Series serves as one-credit of an honors 

elective in mathematics. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

A. General Sequences and Sums 

B. Arithmetic Sequence and series 

C. Geometric Sequence and series 

D. Infinite Series 

E. The Binomial Theorem 

F. Mathematical Induction 

G. Counting Principles 

H. Applications of the Counting Principles, Sequences and Series 

VI. General Education Goals and Learning Outcomes 

1. Education Goal 

The student will develop strategies to analyze and solve math problems 

involving sums, sequences, and series (relates to Gen. Ed. Goals 1.a., 1.b, 

1.c, 1.d, 1.e., 1.f, and 1.g). 



Learning Outcomes: 



The student will be able to: 



 Use Mathematical Induction as a method of proof. 

 State the properties of an arithmetic sequence and a geometric 

sequence and find the nth term and the sum of each. 

2. Educational Goal: 

2 11/26/02 







MATH 212: Summations, Sequences,  Series 



The student will develop the ability to apply geometric and algebraic skills 

quantitatively to sequences, sums, and series (relates to Gen. Ed. Goals 

5.a., 5.b., 5.c, and 5.d.). 



Learning Outcomes: 



The student will be able to: 



 Define a sequence, a sequence of partial sums, and an infinite series 

and distinguish between all three mathematical objects. 

 Define the Binomial Theorem and use it to expand a binomial 

expression and find its nth term 

3. Educational Goal : 

The student will develop the ability to apply sums to problems in selected 

areas of the sciences and social sciences (relates to Gen. Ed. Goal 6.c and 

7.d..). 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Apply the counting principle and the formulas for combinations and 

permutations to problems. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

The following are appropriate to the course and may be included 



 Lecture/discussion 

 Small-group work 

 Graphing Calculator assisted instruction 

 Students in class oral presentations 

 Student Collaboration 

 Independent study. 

3 11/26/02 







MATH 212: Summations, Sequences,  Series 



VIII. Papers, Examinations and other Assessment Instruments 

Student Learning outcomes are assessed using a combination of the following: 



 Teacher written exams 

 In-Class quizzes 

 Labs and/or Projects 

 Student Oral Presentation 

 Final examination 

X. Text and Materials 

Textbook: Precalculus with Limits, a Graphing Approach 3nd ed. Larson, 

R.E., Hostetler, R. P.,  Edwards, B. H. Houghton Mifflin, 2001 



Required technology: A scientific calculator is necessary. A graphing 

calculator is recommended of all students. 



XI. Resources 

No additional resources are needed. 



XII. Honors Courses 

1. This is a one-credit honors course designed to supplement topics in 

Precalculus I, Precalculus II or Foundations of Calculus. 

2. See detailed Educational Goals and Student Learning Outcome in section 

VI. 

3. This is an existing and approved honors course. Its content is at the 

precalculus level. 

4 11/26/02 






