            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Raritan Valley Community College 

Official Course Outline 





MATH 215H: INTRODUCTION TO EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN  

HONORS 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 213H: Introduction to Experimental 

Design  Honors 

B. Date: November 1996 updated Summer 2001, updated Fall 2002 

C. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

D. Semester Credit Hours: 1 

E. Weekly Contact Hours: 1 Lecture: 1 

Laboratory: 0 

F. Prerequisite or Corequisite: MATH 223: Statistics II 

G. Laboratory Fees: None

H. Dept. Chair: Dr. Nora Thornber (nthornberaritanval.edu) 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite or Corequisite: Statistics II. This course is as an honors 
component 

to supplement the existing Statistics II course. Students will become 
familiar 

with the concepts and techniques of experimental design within the context 
of a 

research situation. Students will learn to incorporate statistical software 
to 

interpret more complicated designs. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

Honors courses in mathematics have been developed to provide mathematically 

talented students the opportunity to obtain a level of rigor not currently 
available 

in existing courses. This course is intended for those students who desire 
more 

background into the area of experimental design in statistics, especially 
those in 

psychology, education, or other social science programs. 



02/19/03 Page 1 of 5 





MATH 215: Introduction to Experimental Design 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

A. Introduction to Design satisfies general education requirements in 

mathematics. It serves as one-credit of free elective in mathematics for all 

program. 

B. Introduction to Design transfers as a mathematics course in most liberal 

arts programs. 

C. Introduction to Design serves as one-credit of an honors elective in 

mathematics. 

V. Outline of Course Content: 

A. Analysis of Variance 

1. Terminology 

2. Controlling information in an experiment 

3. The logic behind an ANOVA 

4. Completely randomized designs 

5. Randomized blocks 

6. Two-way factorial experiments 

7. The relationship between ANOVA and regression 

8. Multiple comparisons 

9. Checking assumptions 

B. Nested Sampling 

1. Two-stage nested designs 

2. Three-stage nested designs 

3. Estimating a population mean based on nested sampling 

4. Underlying theory 

5. Comparing two or more populations using nested sampling 

2 11/26/02 







MATH 215: Introduction to Experimental Design 



VI. General Education Goals and Learning Outcomes 

1. Education Goal: 

The student will develop strategies to explain how parts of a design 

influence each other (relates to Gen. Ed. Goals 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e., 
1.f, 

and 1.g.). 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Explain the possible interactions among the variables present in any 

design. 

2. Education Goal: 

The student will develop the ability to apply statistical methods 

quantitatively (relates to Gen. Ed. Goals 5.a., 5.b., 5.c.). 



Learning Outcomes: 



The student will be able to: 



 Justify the error that can occur within any design and explain how to 

correct such error. 

 Interpret the connection between ANOVA and regression. 

3. Educational Goal: 

The student will develop the ability to interpret statistical information 

(relates to Gen. Ed. goal 3.c.). 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Interpret an ANOVA table for any design. 

4. Education Goal: 

The student will develop the ability to apply statistical analysis to 

problems in selected areas of the sciences and social sciences (relates to 

Gen. Ed. Goals 6.c. and 7.d.). 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Determine the appropriate design for different experimental 

situations. 

3 11/26/02 







MATH 215: Introduction to Experimental Design 



VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

The following are appropriate to the course and may be included 



 lecture/discussion 

 small-group work 

 computer-assisted instruction 

 student oral presentations 

 student collaboration 

 independent study 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

Student Learning outcomes are assessed using a combination of the following 



 homework problems 

 tests 

 final examination 

 quizzes 

 projects 

IX. Grade Determinants 

Final grades are determined by a combination of tests, quizzes, projects, 
labs, 

homework, and a final exam. Individual instructors are free to use the above 
in 

any combination. 



X. Texts and Materials 

Any text in Research Design methods may be used such as, Data Analysis for 

Research Designs (Keppel and Zedeck, 1989), modules that accompany the text, 

or handouts generated by the instructor. 



XI. Resources 

No additional resources are needed. 



4 11/26/02 







MATH 215: Introduction to Experimental Design 



XII. Honors Courses: 

1. This is a one-credit honors course designed to supplement topics in 

Statistics II. 

2. See detailed Educational Goals and Student Learning Outcome in section 

VI 

3. This is an existing and approved honors course. Its content is at the 

Statistics II level. 

5 11/26/02 






