            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 





MATH 111 STATISTICS II 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 111 Statistics II 

B. New or Modified Course: Modified 

C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2008 

D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

E. Semester Credit Hours: 3 

F. Weekly Contact Hours: 3 Lecture: 3 

Laboratory: 0 

G. Prerequisites: MATH 110 Statistics I 

H. Laboratory Fees: None 

I. Department Chair: Siham Alfred, salfredraritanval.edu 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite: MATH 110 Statistics I. This course is a continuation of 
Statistics I. 

Topics include description and analysis of bivariate data, regression and 

correlation, inferences in regression, chi-square procedures, inferences in 
two 

means and proportions, simple experimental design, analysis of variance, and 

optional non-parametric tests. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

This course serves as a continuation of Statistics I and offers those 
students who 

are interested in the subject more exposure to statistical inference. 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

A. This course serves is a free elective and as a mathematics elective for 
all 

programs. 

B. This course serves as a General Education course in Mathematics. 

OAA/je 1 



4/2/2008 





C. This course may serve as a math requirement for all A.A. programs and 
some 

A.S. programs. The programs that list this course as one of the math courses 

to choose from are Business and Respiratory Care. 

D. This course will transfer as a mathematics course in most liberal arts 

programs. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

A. Statistical Inference 

1. Nature and Design of Hypothesis Tests  classical and modern 

2. Interpretation of Results 

3. Type I and Type II Errors 

4. Power analysis 

5. p-values 

B. Inferences About Two Population Means 

1. Independent and dependent Samples 

2. Tests for differences between Two Means 

3. Tests for differences between Two Proportions 

4. Tests for standard deviations 

5. Chi-square procedures 

C. Inferences About More Than Two Population Means 

1. The F-Distribution 

2. The Logic behind Analysis of Variance 

3. One-Way ANOVA 

4. Two-Way ANOVA 

D. Descriptive Measures for Bivariate Data 

1. Scatter plots 

2. Linear Equations with One Independent Variable 

3. The Regression Equation 

4. The Correlation Coefficient 

5. The Coefficient of Determination 

E. Inferences for Regression and Correlation 

1. Standard Error of the Estimate 

2. Inferences for Regression and Correlation Coefficients 

3. The model for Multiple Regression 

F. Non-Parametric Tests (optional) 

VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

A. General Education Goals 

OAA/je 2 



4/2/2008 





Students will: 



1. apply mathematical arguments to problems. (G. E. 1) 

2. solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (G. E. 7) 

B. Learning Outcomes 

Students will be able to: 



1. Use methods of inferential statistics to interpret data for the 

purposes of decision-making in hypothesis tests, including 

independent and dependent means, proportions, ANOVA, and chi-

square procedures. 

2. Conduct an appropriate hypothesis test using both classical and 

modern (p-value) procedures. 

3. Use methods of descriptive statistics on bivariate data to assess the 

relationship between two variables. 

4. Use linear regression techniques for purposes of analysis and 

prediction. 

5. Conduct a simple statistical study (experimental or observational), 

including the sampling design, interpretation of computer results 

from collected data, and inference from these results to a 

conclusion consistent with the design. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

A. lecture/discussion 

B. small-group work 

C. computer-assisted instruction 

D. guest speakers 

E. laboratory 

F. student oral presentations 

G. student collaboration 

H. independent study 

I. homework 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

A. teacher written tests 

B. computer/calculator lab projects 

C. semester projects 

D. final examination 

E. in-class quizzes 

IX. Grade Determinants 

OAA/je 3 



4/2/2008 





A. tests 

B. quizzes 

C. homework 

D. projects 

E. labs 

F. cumulative final exam 

X. Texts and Materials 

A. Suggested textbook: Introductory Statistics, Alternate Windows Version, 

(latest edition). Neil A. Weiss. Pearson Addison-Wesley. 

B. Supplementary textbook (optional): Interpreting Basic Statistics, 3rd ed. 

Zealure C. Holcomb. Pyrczak Publishing, 2002. 

B. Computer-based sources: The instructor is free to choose the type of 

technology. Choices include but are not limited to: 

1. MINITAB 

2. TI-84 graphing calculator 

3. EXCEL 

4. SAS 

Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course 
content and 

resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC 
Bookstore 

is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 



XI. Resources 

Because of the technology used in the course, classes should be held in a 
CATT 

room where the instructor can access both MINITAB and the web. MINITAB 

software needs to be available in S020, the open lab, and any other computer 
lab 

where students may be working. 



OAA/je 4 



4/2/2008 




