            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



1



              RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

                   ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE

    MATH 102 - PROBLEM SOLVING STRATEGIES IN MATHEMATICS

                              



I. Basic Course Information



     A. Course Number and Title:   MATH 102, Problem Solving

     Strategies in Mathematics

     

     B. Date of Proposal:     September 2002

     

     C. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics

     

     D. Semester Credit Hours:     3.0

     

     E.  Weekly Contact Hours:     Lecture: 2.0

     Laboratory: 2.0

     

     F.   Prerequisites:  Intermediate Algebra, Algebra  Mod

     4, or a

                    satisfactory score on placement test

     

     G. Laboratory Fees: None

     

     H. New course offered first Fall 2002

     

     I.   Department Chair: Dr. Nora Thornber, (908) 526-1200

          ext. 8538

          nthornberaritanval.edu





II.  Catalog Description



     This  course  is  designed as  a  transfer  course  for

     students  seeking degrees in Elementary  Education  and

     Early  Childhood  Education.   Emphasis  is  placed  on

     computational skills, problem solving and teaching  via

     a  hands-on  approach.  Topics include  number  theory,

     probability,   statistics,  functions,  geometry,   and

     measurement.   The  prerequisites for  the  course  are

     either  Intermediate  Algebra,  Algebra  Mod  4,  or  a

     satisfactory score on placement test.

   



III.  Statement of Course Need

  

   Background:

   Raritan Valley Community College was one of 18 community

   colleges out of 65 applicants chosen to participate in

   the NSF funded Phi Theta Kappa grant Preparing

   Tomorrows Science  Math Teachers: The Community

   College Response.  This multi-component project is

   designed to enhance and expand the role of community

   colleges in preparing future K-12 science, mathematics,

   and technology teachers to meet the countrys current

   critical teacher shortage.



   First National Teacher Preparation Conference:

   On March 15 - 17, 2002, the first national conference

   was held in New Orleans, Louisiana.  The purpose of this

   conference was to provide the selected colleges with

   extensive mentoring services, and an array of proven

   teacher preparation activities, courses, and curricula.

   The conference focused on the roles that community

   colleges can assume in recruiting future science, math,

   and technology teachers, preparing them, and providing

   them with an understanding of the needs of today

   technological workforce.  By the end of the conference,

   our team had developed an Action Plan to be implemented

   during the projects thirteen month period (March 1,

   2002 - March 31, 2003).

   

   Projects Action Plan:

   As a result of the conference and subsequent Action

   Plan, it was identified that RVCC needs to develop an

   additional Mathematics course (in addition to the

   already existing Number Systems course) that will

   complete the Mathematics requirements and provide

   seamless transfer of our Elementary Education students

   as juniors into Kean University. After reviewing Kean

   Universitys course outline, student requirements, and

   reviewing their assessment of their students and what

   areas they need to improve upon, the Mathematics

   Department at RVCC has decided that there is a genuine

   need to develop a Problem Solving Course with a large

   critical thinking and hands on component.

   

   This collaborative effort, in partnership with Kean

   University, will likely form the foundation of a much

   larger initiative that will result in an increased

   supply of math and science teachers with stronger

   preparation in content and pedagogy.

     

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum



  A.  Check the item(s) applicable to this course:

         Free elective (This applies automatically to all credit

       courses in the College.)

         The course serves as a General Education Elective in

       Mathematics.

         The course meets a mathematics requirement in the

       Elementary Education program, the Liberal Arts Program, and

       the future AA degree for transfer in Early Childhood

       Education.

  

  

V. Outline of Course Content

     

     Mathematics  is  seen  as a cooperative  venture  among

     students in which they are encouraged to explore, build

     connections among concepts, and solve problems  growing

     out  of  their explorations. The mathematical knowledge

     needed  for  teaching  is  quite  different  from  that

     required by college students pursuing other mathematics-

     related professions.  Prospective teachers need a solid

     understanding of mathematics so that they can teach  it

     as  a  coherent, reasoned activity and communicate  its

     elegance and power.  This course teaches mathematics in

     the  connected  sense-making way that  future  teachers

     need  and  is consistent with the National  Council  of

     Teachers  of Mathematics Principles and Standards  for

     School  Mathematics  as well as other  recent  national

     reports on school mathematics.  The topics include  but

     are not limited to:

     

     A.   Problem Solving

          1.   Set Theory

2.   Logic and Problem Solving

     B.   Number Theory

          1.   Whole Numbers/Integers Operations

2.   Order of Operations

3.   Prime and Composite numbers

4.   Greatest Common Divisor

5.   Least Common Multiple

6.   Patterns

     C.   Probability

          1.   Properties of probability

2.   Counting Principles

     D.   Statistics

          1.   Data Organization/Representing Data

2.   Measures of Central Tendency/Dispersion

     E.   Rational/Irrational Numbers

          1.   Fraction Operations

2.   Ratio/Proportion

3.   Decimal Representation

4.   Percent Representation

5.   Irrational Numbers

     F.   Function Basics

          1.   Definition of a Function

2.   Equations and Inequalities

3.   Cartesian Coordinate System

4.   Systems of Linear Equations

5.   Exponents/Scientific Notation

     G.   Geometry Basics

          1.   Two-dimensional Geometry

2.   Constructions

3.   Three-dimensional Geometry

     H.   Measurement

          1.   Angles

2.   Perimeter/Area/Volume

3.   Tessellations

4.   Transformations/Rotations/Reflections



VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes

     

   General Education Goals

   

   The student will:

   

   1 develop the ability to think critically.

       a.   Draw reasonable inferences from observations.

b.   Classify and organize information.

c.   Analyze and synthesize information.

d.   State a problem clearly.

e.   Develop problem solving strategies.

f.   Interpret information and draw conclusions.

   2 develop the ability to communicate effectively.

       a.   Read and listen analytically, with understanding and

         openness toward another point of view.

b.   Write and speak clearly, accurately, and fluently with

focus and continuity in standard American English.

c.   Organize information to develop and support a main

idea.

   3  collect,   organize,  and  evaluate  information   to

       address different kinds of problems.

       a.   Access information from libraries and other sources.

b.   Develop clearly defined and suitable research topics

which can be completed with available resources.

c.   Collect organize, evaluate, and present information

about a topic.

   5 develop the ability to reason quantitatively.

       a.   Demonstrate basic arithmetic and algebraic skills.

b.   Apply mathematical or statistical skills to other

disciplines.

c.   Use mathematics to solve everyday problems.

d.   Demonstrate knowledge of basic spatial and geometric

relations.

   6  develop  an  understanding of fundamental principles,

       concepts,  and  methods of mathematics  in  order  to

       effectively teach them.

       a.   Define a properly designed experiment.

b.   Make observations, test hypotheses, and solve problems

in a selected area of the sciences.

       

   

   Student Learning Outcomes

   

   The student will be able to:

   

   A.   Demonstrate the technique of prime factoring and use

     the process to determine least common multiples and greatest

     common factors.

B.   Write and teach a lesson plan on any one of the topics

in the course outline.

C.    Gather information and analyze data using set theory

and logic.

D.   Recognize the Euclidean geometry of points, lines,

planes, and angles.

E.   Perform many levels of mathematical operations on

various representations of numbers.

F.   Construct various type of patterns using tessellations,

transformations, rotations and reflections.

G.   Identify, graph and solve linear equations/inequalities

and use the process to solve application problems.

H.   Demonstrate adding/subtracting/multiplying/dividing

rational expressions and use the process to solve

application problems.

   

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning



     Given the goals and outcomes described above, the

     following formats, modes, and methods for teaching and

     learning are appropriate to the course:

           lecture/discussion

    small-group work

    guest speakers

    laboratory

    student oral presentations

    simulation/role playing

    student collaboration



VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments

     

     Given the outcomes described above, the following

     assessment methods will be used:

           laboratory reports

    research papers

    lesson plans

    presentations (teaching) of lesson plans

    essays

    math games



IX. Grade Determinants



     The following will be used to determine the students

     final grade:

           Lesson plans

    Lab reports on results from working with manipulatives

and problem solving activities

    Creative math games

    Term paper on creative teaching techniques for K-8 math

students.

    Midterm

    Final exam

     

X.  Texts and Materials



           Textbook: Mathematics for Elementary Teachers via

          Problem Solving by Masingila, Lester, and Raymond

    Student Activity Manual: Mathematics for Elementary

Teachers via Problem Solving by Masingila, Lester, and

Raymond

    Journals: NCTM Journals: Mathematics Teacher,

Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School, Teaching Children

Mathematics

    Web sources

    Manipulatives



XI. Resources



     This course will require extensive use of math

     manipulatives for use and understanding during the lab

     component of this course.  Manipulatives include, but

     are not limited to, a fraction bars classroom center, a

     geometry classroom set, compasses, rulers, and a

     dedicated classroom for this and the Elementary

     Education courses.





-----------------------------7d33874c02b2--
