            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 





MATH 152 CALCULUS II 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 152 Calculus II 

B. New or Modified Course: Modified Course 

C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2008 

D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

E. Semester Credit Hours: 4 

F. Weekly Contact Hours: 5 Lecture: 3 

Laboratory: 2 

G. Prerequisite: MATH 151 Calculus I 

H. Laboratory Fees: None 

I. Department Chair: Dr. Siham Alfred, salfredraritanval.edu 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite: MATH 151 Calculus I. The second semester of a three-semester 

sequence of introductory calculus with a technology-based computer 
laboratory. 

Topics include integration techniques, integration applications in various 

coordinate systems, indeterminate forms, improper integrals, and infinite 
series. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

This course is a perquisite for MATH 251 Calculus III. This course also 
serves as 

a math requirement for programs in Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering 

Science, General Science, and Mathematics. 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

A. This course is a free elective and a Mathematics elective for all 
programs. 

B. This course serves as a General Education requirement in Mathematics. 

C. This course meets a program requirement in Chemistry, Computer Science, 

Engineering Science, General Science, and Mathematics. 

1 





D. This course transfers as a second semester calculus course. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

A. Applications of Integration 

1. Area of a region between two curves 

2. Volume, disk method and shell method 

B. Integration Techniques, LHpitals Rule, and Improper Integrals 

1. Basic integration rules, integration by parts, trigonometric 

substitution 

2. Partial fractions tables 

3. Indeterminate forms and LHpitals Rule 

4. Improper integrals 

C. Infinite Series 

1. Sequences, series, and convergence 

2. Integral test, p-series, comparison test 

3. Alternating series, ratio test, root test 

4. Taylor polynomials and approximations power series 

5. Representation of functions by power series Taylor and Mclaurin 

series 

D. Conics, Parametric Equations, and Polar Coordinates 

1. Conics and calculus 

2. Plane curves and parametric equations parametric equations and 

calculus 

3. Polar coordinates and polar graphs 

4. Area and arc length in polar coordinates 

5. Polar equations of conics and Keplers Laws 

VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

A. General Education Goals 

Students will: 



1. apply mathematical arguments to problems. (G. E. 1) 

2. solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (G. E. 7) 

B. Learning Outcomes 

Students will be able to: 



1. use algebraic techniques such as trigonometric substitutions, partial 

fractions, and by parts, to evaluate integrals. 

2 





2. utilize integration techniques to solve problems involving volumes 

and surface areas of solids of revolution, centroids, and arclength. 

3. use the concept of limit to evaluate improper integrals and 

indeterminate forms. 

4. test infinite series for convergence and or divergence. 

5. use Taylor polynomials to estimate function values. 

6. operate in alternate reference frames including polar and 

parametric coordinates. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

A. tests 

B. quizzes 

C. cumulative final examination 

D. projects 

E. homework 

F. small groups 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

A. tests 

B. final examination 

C. projects 

D. laboratory products 

E. quizzes 

IX. Grade Determinants 

A. cumulative final examination 

B. tests 

C. projects 

D. individual teacher determinants 

X. Texts and Materials 

The following text and materials are required for the course: 



A. Suggested Textbook: Thomas Calculus, latest ed., by Weir, Hass, 

Giordano, Pearson Addison Wesley 

B. Graphing calculator may be required. TI-84 is recommended. 

Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course 
content and 

resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC 
Bookstore 

is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 



XI. Resources 

3 





This course is held in a computer lab for two hours a week. The computers 
need 

to be installed with the math software currently licensed to the math 
department. 

Contact the math department to determine which software to install. 



4 




