            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 

 

MATH 030R INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA W/BASIC ALGEBRA 
REVIEW 

 

 

I. Basic Course Information 

 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 030R Intermediate Algebra w/ Basic 
Algebra Review 

 

B. New or Modified Course: New 

 

C. Date of Proposal: Semester: Fall Year: 2012 

 

D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

 

E. Semester Credit Hours: 6NC 

 

F. Weekly Contact Hours: 6 Lecture: 6 

 Laboratory: 0 

G. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Math 020 Elementary Algebra, Math020W 
Elementary Algebra with Workshop, or appropriate score on the placement test. 

 

H. Laboratory Fees: None 

 

I. Name and Telephone Number or E-Mail Address of Department Chair: 
Rosemarie Gorini, rgorini@raritanval.edu 

 

II. Catalog Description 

 

Prerequisite(s): Math 020 Elementary Algebra, Math 020W Elementary Algebra 
w/Workshop or appropriate score on placement test. 
This course is designed to review and expand on the concepts in Elementary 
Algebra and prepare students for success in Precalculus and Statistics courses. 
The topics are the same as those in Intermediate Algebra with additional focus on 
reviewing algebra foundations. The topics include solving linear and quadratic 
equations and inequalities, graphing linear and quadratic equations, rational and 
radical expressions, integer and rational exponents, absolute value equations, 
introduction to functions and their graphs and systems of linear equations. 

 

 

 

 


III. Statement of Course Need 

 

A. Students in math-intensive majors, requiring precalculus or statistics, who 
currently place into Elementary Algebra, are required to complete both 
Elementary and Intermediate Algebra before they are eligible for a college level 
course. The current Intermediate Algebra course builds upon concepts taught in 
Elementary Algebra. By expanding the Intermediate Algebra course to include a 
review of basic algebra, students who meet the criteria for Intermediate Algebra 
w/Basic Algebra Review can complete their developmental math requirement in 
one semester. 

 

B. There is no lab component. 

 

C. This is a developmental course and not designed for transfer. 

 

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

 

A. This is a Developmental Course and carries no college credit. 


 

V. Outline of Course Content 

 

 A Basic Concepts (review) 

 1. Real numbers 

 2. Powers, square roots, order of operations 

 3. Exponents, scientific notation 

 4. Variable expressions 

 

 B. Linear Equations and Inequalities 

 1. First-degree equations with one unknown; formulas (review) 

 2. Absolute value equations and inequalities 

 3. Application Problems 

 4. Linear inequalities (review) 

 5. Compound inequalities (review) 

 

C. Equations and Inequalities in Two Variables and Functions 

 1. Graphing (review) 

 2. Slope; equations of a line (review) 

 3. Linear inequalities in two variables 

 4. Introduction to functions 

 5. Linear functions and their graphs 

 

D. Systems of Linear Equations and Inequalities 

 1. Systems in two variables 

 2. Applications 

 3. Systems of linear inequalities 

 


E. Polynomials 

 1. Operations with polynomials 

 2. Common factors; factoring by grouping (review) 

 3. Factoring trinomials (review) 

 4. Special cases of factoring 

 5. Solving polynomial equations by factoring 

 

F. Rational Expressions and Equations 

 1. Operations with rational expressions 

 2. Complex rational expressions 

 3. Rational equations and applications 

 

G. Rational Exponents and Radicals 

 1. Exponents; radical expressions 

 2. Operations with radicals 

 3. Radical equations and their applications 

 4. Complex numbers 

 

H. Quadratic Equations and Inequalities 

 1. Quadratic functions 

 2. Solving quadratic equations by completing the square and the 
quadratic formula. 

 3. Equations transformed into quadratic form 

 4. Quadratic applications 

 5. Quadratic Inequalities in one variable 

 

I. Conic Sections 

 1. Distance formula and circle 

 2. Parabola 

 

 

 

 

VI. General Education and Course Learning Outcomes 

 

A. General Education Learning Outcomes: 


 

 At the completion of the course, students will be able to: 

 

1. Solve and/or graph linear and quadratic equations and inequalities. (GE-
NJ2) 
2. Develop the equation of lines in standard form, point/slope form, and 
slope/intercept form. (GE-NJ2) 
3. Solve systems of linear equations and inequalities. (GE-NJ2) 
4. Solve rational and radical equations. (GE-NJ2) 



5. Perform operations on polynomial-based expressions, expressions that 
contain integer and rational exponents, and rational and radical 
expressions. (GE-NJ2) 
6. Solve application problems. (GE-NJ2) 


 

B. Course Learning Outcomes: 

 

 None 

 

 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

 

A. lecture/discussion 
B. small-group work 
C. computer-assisted instruction 


 

 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

 

A. classwork/homework/quizzes 
B. chapter tests 
C. departmental final exam 
D. computer assignments 


 

IX. Grade Determinants 

 

A. chapter tests 
B. departmental final exam 
C. assignments/homework/quizzes 


 

X. Texts and Materials 

 

A. Suggested text: Intermediate Algebra (7th ed) by Tobey, Slater, Blair and 
Crawford. Published by Pearson. 

 

 (Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course content and 
resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC Bookstore is the 
sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks.) 

 

 

XI. Resources 

 

 

A. Pearson’s MyMathLab in MyLabsPlus 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 


