            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Raritan Valley Community College 

Official Course Outline 





MATH 214H: MATHEMATICAL THINKING  HONORS 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 214H: Mathematical Thinking  

Honors 

B. Date: November 1996 updated Summer 2001, updated Fall 2002 

C. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

D. Semester Credit Hours: 1 

E. Weekly Contact Hours: 1 Lecture: 1 

Laboratory: 0 

F. Prerequisite or Corequisite: MATH 311: Unified Calculus I 

G. Laboratory Fees: None

H. Dept. Chair: Dr. Nora Thornber (nthornberaritanval.edu) 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite or Corequisite: Unified Calculus I. This course is designed to 

introduce students to the techniques of understanding and writing 
mathematical 

proof. Emphasis is on analyzing and writing proofs. Problems from a variety 
of 

mathematical areas are considered. Topics include set notation and 
operations, 

proof techniques, and induction. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

Honors courses in mathematics have been developed to provide mathematically 

talented students the opportunity to obtain a level of rigor not currently 
available 

in existing courses. The concept of mathematical proof is fundamental to all 

areas of mathematics, but is not stressed in any of the currently-offered 
courses. 

The ability to understand the underlying logic in proof requires effective 

mathematical communication. This course will introduce the student to both 
the 

language and the logic used by mathematicians to work through problems that 

cannot be solved by simply substituting numbers into a template. 



02/19/03 Page 1 of 4 





MATH 214: Mathematical Thinking - Honors 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

A. Mathematical Thinking satisfies general education requirements in 

mathematics. It serves as one-credit of free elective in mathematics for all 

programs. 

B. Mathematical Thinking transfers as a mathematics course in most liberal 

arts programs. 

C. Mathematical Thinking serves as one-credit of an honors elective in 

mathematics. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

A. Forward-backward method 

B. Definitions and terminology 

C. Quantifiers, Construction method 

D. Quantifiers, Choose method 

E. Quantifiers, Specialization 

F. Nested Quantifiers 

G. Contradiction Method 

H. Contrapositive Method 

I. Induction 

VI. General Education Goals and Learning Outcomes 

1. Education Goal: 

The student will develop strategies to achieve precision in the use of 

mathematical language (relates to Gen. Ed. Goals 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e., 

1.f, and 1.g.). 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Use the different methods of proof to prove a mathematical statement. 

2. Education Goal: 

The student will develop the ability to create proofs (relates to Gen. Ed. 

Goals 5.a. and 5.d.). 



2 11/26/02 







MATH 214: Mathematical Thinking - Honors 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Manipulate quantified statements following the rules of mathematical 

logic. 

3. Education Goal: 

The student will develop the ability to apply mathematical thinking to 

problems in selected areas of the sciences (relates to Gen. Ed. Goal 6.c.) 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Translate a written statement into its mathematical form using 

appropriate quantifiers. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

The following are appropriate to the course and may be included 



 lecture/discussion 

 small-group work 

 computer-assisted instruction 

 student oral presentations 

 student collaboration 

 independent study 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instrument 

Student Learning outcomes are assessed using a combination of the following: 



 homework problems 

 tests 

 final examination 

 quizzes 

 essays 

 oral presentation 

3 11/26/02 







MATH 214: Mathematical Thinking - Honors 



IX. Grade Determinants 

Final grades are determined by a combination of tests, quizzes, projects, 
labs, 

homework, and a final exam. Individual instructors are free to use the above 
in 

any combination. 



X. Texts and Materials 

Textbook: How to Read and Do Proofs, 3rd edition, by Daniel Solow, John 

Wiley  Sons Inc., 2002 

XI. Resources 

No additional resources are needed. 

XII. Honors Courses 

1. Mathematical Thinking deals with the subject of mathematical proof. 

While it is always present in other math courses, formal proof is not 

usually emphasized. A typical course in mathematical proof is usually 

offered to mathematics majors at the junior-year level. This course 

introduces the calculus student to the fundamentals of proof and gives 

them experience in creating their own formal proofs of mathematical 

statements. 

2. See detailed Educational Goals and Student Learning Outcome in section 

VI. 

3. This is an existing and approved honors course. 

calculus level. 

Its content is at the 



4 11/26/02 






