            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 

 MATH 108 

MATHEMATICAL REASONING FOR EDUCATORS II 

 

 

I. Basic Course Information 

 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 108 


Mathematical Reasoning for Educators II 

 

B. New or Modified Course: New 

 

C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2015 

 

D. Effective Term: Fall 2015 

 

E. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

 

F. Semester Credit Hours: 3.0 

 

G. Weekly Contact Hours: Lecture: 2.0 

 Laboratory: 2.0 

 

H. Prerequisites: MATH 107 Mathematical Reasoning for Educators I 

 

I. Laboratory Fees: none 

 

J. Name and Telephone Number or E-Mail Address of Department Chair at time of 
approval: Rosemarie Gorini (908-526-1200 ext. 8546) rosemarie.gorini@raritanval.edu 

 

 

II. Catalog Description 

 

Prerequisites: MATH 107, Mathematical Reasoning for Educators I. 

 

This course, the second in a sequence, is designed as a transfer course for students seeking degrees 
in Elementary & Middle School Education and Early Childhood Education. Emphasis is placed 
on computational skills, problem solving and teaching via a hands-on approach. Topics include 
problem solving strategies, number theory, and algebraic structures. 

 

 


III. Statement of Course Need 

 

Background: 

 

The Mathematical Reasoning for Educators I and II sequence is a result of a dialogue which 
began fall 2009 and has continued through and probably beyond 2015. Representatives from 
two and four year schools in New Jersey (members of the New Jersey Association of 
Mathematics Teacher Educators, NJAMTE) met several times to discuss appropriate teacher 
preparation courses in Mathematics. Discussions and presentations revolved around a 
comprehensive aligned curriculum that would prepare students to successfully complete the 
Mathematics portion of the Praxis Core and ensure that teachers at the elementary and middle 
school levels are well prepared to teach Common Core Mathematics in their classrooms. During 
the 2013 Mathematics Program Review, external consultant, Bonnie Gold recommended a two 
course sequence “to do a better job of preparing future elementary teachers to teach the new 
standards”. Several of the four year colleges have moved to a two course sequence aimed at 
eliminating redundancy and fostering a more in-depth study of the concepts relative to the K-6 
curriculum. This is consistent with a report issued by the Conference Board of Mathematical 
Sciences entitled The Mathematical Education of Teachers. This report which was done in 
conjunction with the American Mathematical Society and the Mathematical Association of 
America makes two major recommendations: 

. Future teachers need mathematics courses that develop an in-depth understanding of the 
mathematics they will teach 
. Elementary and middle school programs should include at least 9 semester hours in the 
mathematical knowledge needed to teach school mathematics well. 


 

MATH-108 Mathematical Reasoning for Educators II is second course in that sequence. It is 
designed to provide students with an in-depth understanding of elementary mathematics while 
providing content knowledge for the Praxis Core exam. 

 

 

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

 

A. Free elective. (This applies automatically to all credit courses in the College.) 
B. The course may serve as a General Education Elective in Mathematics for Education 
Majors. 
C. This course meets a mathematics requirement for the AA in Education: P-5 degree for 
those students pursuing Early Childhood, Elementary Teacher or Middle School 
certification. 
D. To see course transferability: a) for New Jersey schools, go to the NJ Transfer 
website, www.njtransfer.org; b) for all other colleges and universities, go to the 
individual websites. 


 

V. Outline of Course Content 

 

Prospective teachers need a solid understanding of mathematics so that they can teach it as a 
coherent, reasoned activity and communicate its elegance and power. 


 

In this course, students will work cooperatively and use physical materials to explore geometric 
concepts, spatial reasoning and measurement. They will become aware of the relationship of 
mathematics to other disciplines and its applications in society by solving problems involving 
data analysis, statistics and probability. 

 

This course will address the fundamental principles that underlie elementary school mathematics 
from advanced viewpoint. 

 

Topics addressed include: 

 

A. Probability 
1. Properties of probability 
i. Measure of likelihood 
ii. Randomness 
iii. Mutual exclusivity 


2. Counting Principles 
3. Empirical and theoretical probability 
4. Simulations 




 

B. Data Analysis and Statistics 
1. Random Sampling 
2. Data Organization, Representation and Interpretation 
3. Measures of Central Tendency and Dispersion 
4. Statistical Inference 




 

C. Geometry Basics 
1. Two and Three-dimensional Geometry 
2. Graphing points, lines & functions on the coordinate plane 
3. Connections between Algebra and Geometry 
4. Measurement 
i. Units of measure 
ii. Comparison and conversion from one unit to another 
iii. Derive and use formulas for Perimeter/Area/Volume/Surface Area for 
basic shapes 


5. Lines and Angles 
6. Congruence and Similarity 
7. Symmetry 
8. Tessellations and Transformations 




 


 

VI. General Education and Course Learning Outcomes 

 

A. General Education Learning Outcomes: 


 

 At the completion of the course, students will be able to: 

1. Gather information, use a variety of data representation techniques and analyze 
data using measures of central tendency and dispersion. (GE - NJ2) 
2. Apply principles of probability to determine likelihood of outcomes. (GE - NJ2) 
3. Solve mathematical application problems utilizing the Euclidean geometry of 
points, lines, planes, and angles. (GE - NJ2) 
4. Construct various types of patterns using tessellations, transformations, rotations 
and reflections. (GE - NJ2) 


 

 

B. Course Learning Outcomes: 


 

See above 

 

 C. Assessment Instruments 

 

1. Gather information, use a variety of data representation techniques and 
analyze data using measures of central tendency and dispersion. 
2. Apply principles of probability to determine likelihood of outcomes. 
3. Solve mathematical application problems utilizing the Euclidean geometry of 
points, lines, planes, and angles. 
4. Construct various types of patterns using tessellations, transformations, 
rotations and reflections. 


 

Given the outcomes described above, LIST which of the following assessment methods 
may be used; please note any instruments that will be required to assess outcomes as 
listed above (e.g., research papers for information literacy): 

 

A. laboratory reports 
B. research papers 
C. presentations 
D. math games 
E. quizzes, tests, cumulative exams 


 

VII. Grade Determinants 

 

A. lab reports resulting from work with manipulatives and problem solving activities 
B. oral presentations 
C. creative math games 
D. tests or midterm 
E. cumulative final exam 



 

Given the goals and outcomes described above, LIST the primary formats, modes, and 
methods for teaching and learning that may be used in the course: 

A. lecture/discussion 
B. small-group work 
C. computer-assisted instruction 
D. guest speakers 
E. laboratory 
F. student oral presentations 
G. student collaboration 
H. paper or computer homework 
I. independent study 


 

 

VIII. Texts and Materials 

 

A. suggested textbook 
B. paper and/or online homework assignments to accompany textbook 
C. film and video 
D. web sources 
E. other computer-based sources 
F. manipulatives 


 

 

 (Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course content and resources. Do 
not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC Bookstore is the sole resource for the 
most up-to-date information about textbooks.) 

 

IX. Resources 

 

A. student computer labs 
B. cards & dice 
C. compass & protractor 
D. Unifix cubes 
E. tangrams/polydrons/geometric shapes 


 


