            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 





MATH 151 CALCULUS I 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 151 Calculus I 

B. New or Modified Course: Modified Course 

C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2008 

D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

E. Semester Credit Hours: 4 

F. Weekly Contact Hours: 5 Lecture: 3 

Laboratory: 2 

G. Prerequisites: Three-and-one-half years of college preparatory 
mathematics 

including Trigonometry and a satisfactory score on a placement test, or 

MATH 113 Precalculus II, or MATH 114H Precalculus Honors 

H. Laboratory Fees: None 

I. Department Chair: Dr. Siham Alfred, salfredraritanval.edu 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite: Three-and-one-half years of college preparatory mathematics 

including Trigonometry and a satisfactory score on a placement test, or MATH 

113 Precalculus II, or MATH 114H Precalculus Honors. Introductory calculus 

with a technology-based computer laboratory component. Topics include 
limits, 

differentiation, applications of derivatives, integration, the Fundamental 
Theorem 

of Calculus, and logarithmic, exponential, and other transcendental 
functions. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

This course is a perquisite for MATH 152 Calculus II. This course also 
serves as a 

math requirement for programs in Biology, Computer Science, Engineering 

Science, General Science, and Mathematics. 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

1 





A. This course is a free elective and a Mathematics elective for all 
programs. 

B. This course serves as a General Education requirement in Mathematics. 

C. This course meets a program requirement in Biology, Computer Science, 

Engineering Science, General Science, and Mathematics. 

D. This course transfers as a first semester calculus course. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

A. Limits and their properties 

1. Preview 

2. Finding limits graphically, numerically, and analytically 

3. Continuity and one-sided limits 

4. Infinite limits 

B. Differentiation 

1. The derivative and the tangent line problem 

2. Basic Differentiation rules and rates of change 

3. Product rule, quotient rule, higher-order derivatives 

4. Chain rule 

5. Implicit differentiation 

6. Related rates 

C. Applications of differentiation 

1. Extrema 

2. Rolles theorem, mean value theorem 

3. Increasing and decreasing functions and the first derivative test 

4. Concavity and the second derivative test 

5. Limits at infinity 

6. Summary of curve sketching 

7. Optimization problems 

8. Newtons method, differentials 

D. Integration 

1. Antiderivatives and indefinite integration 

2. Area, Riemann sums, and definite integrals 

3. Fundamental theorm of calculus 

4. Integration by substitution numerical integration 

E. Logarithmic, exponential, and other transcendental functions 

1. Natural logarithmic functions: differentiation, integration 

2. Inverse functions 

3. Exponential functions: differentiation, integration 

4. Bases other than e and their applications 

5. Differential equations: growth and decay, separation of variables 

6. Inverse trigonometric functions: differentiation and integration 

7. Hyperbolic functions 

2 





VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

A. General Education Goals 

Students will: 



1. apply mathematical arguments to problems. (G. E. 1) 

2. solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (G. E. 7) 

B. Learning Outcomes 

Students will be able to: 



1. utilize the concept of instantaneous rate of change to solve 

problems in physics, biology, economics, and other real-world 

phenomena. 

2. differentiate polynomial, rational, exponential, logarithmic, 

and trigonometric functions algebraically. 

3. demonstrate the relationship between the algebraic and geometric 

properties of the derivative. 

4. use the concept of antiderivative to algebraically evaluate integrals 

involving simple substitutions. 

5. demonstrate the relationship between differentiation and 

integration using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. 

6. apply the derivative procedure to optimization problems. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

A. tests 

B. quizzes 

C. cumulative final examination 

D. projects 

E. homework 

F. small groups 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

A. tests 

B. final examination 

C. projects 

D. laboratory products 

E. quizzes 

IX. Grade Determinants 

3 





A. cumulative final examination 

B. tests 

C. projects 

D. individual teacher determinants 

X. Texts and Materials 

The following text and materials are required for the course: 



A. Suggested Textbook: Thomas Calculus, latest ed., by Weir, Hass, 

Giordano, Pearson Addison Wesley 

B. Graphing calculator may be required. TI-84 is recommended. 

Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course 
content and 

resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC 
Bookstore 

is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 



XI. Resources 

This course is held in a computer lab for two hours a week. The computers 
need 

to be installed with the math software currently licensed to the math 
department. 

Contact the math department to determine which software to install. 



4 




