            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Raritan Valley Community College 

Official Course Outline 





MATH 211H: PRECALCULUS (Honors) 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 211H: Precalculus (Honors) 

B. Date of Proposal: Updated October, 2005 

C. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

D. Semester Credit Hours: 5 

E. Weekly Contact Hours: 5 Lecture: 5 

Laboratory: 0 

F. Prerequisite: MATH 021: Intermediate Algebra, or 

MATH 025: Algebra Mod 4: Rational  Radical Behavior, 

or appropriate score on math placement test. 

G. Laboratory Fees: none

H. Dept. Chair: Dr. Nora Thornber (nthornberaritanval.edu) 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisite: MATH021 Intermediate Algebra or MATH025 Algebra Mod 4: 

Rational  Radical Behavior or appropriate score on Placement Test. This is 
an 

honors course designed for students preparing to study calculus. The 
material 

covered in this course combines the material in BOTH MATH 112 Precalculus I 

and MATH 113 Precalculus II. Topics include the study of polynomial, 
rational, 

logarithmic, exponential, and trigonometric functions and other topics from 

algebra, trigonometry and analytic geometry. Students who successfully 

complete Precalculus (Honors) can proceed directly into the study of 
calculus. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

This course serves as a prerequisite to the study of calculus. 



02/19/03 Page 1 of 5 





MATH 211: Foundations for Calculus  Honors 



IV. Place of the Course in the College Curriculum 

A. Precalculus (Honors) satisfies general education requirements in 

Mathematics. It serves as a mathematics elective for all programs. It may 

also be used to satisfy mathematics requirements for programs in 

mathematics, science, and engineering. 

B. Precalculus (Honors) transfers as a mathematics course in most liberal 
arts 

programs. 

C. Precalculus (Honors) is an honors course. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

A. Functions and Their Graphs 

1. Function definition 

2. Graphs: shifts, translations, reflections, stretches 

3. Combinations of functions 

4. Inverse functions 

B. Polynomial and Rational Functions 

1. Quadratic functions 

2. Higher degree polynomials 

3. Complex numbers 

4. Fundamental Theorem of Algebra 

5. Rational functions and asymptotes 

6. Graphs of rational functions 

C. Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 

1. Exponential characteristics, properties, graphs 

2. Logarithmic characteristics, properties, graphs 

3. Solving equations involving exponents and logs 

4. Non-linear models 

D. Trigonometric Functions 

1. Radian and degree measure 

2. Circular and right triangle trigonometry 

3. Trigonometric graphs 

4. Inverse trigonometric functions 

5. Trigonometric models 

2 12/04/02 







MATH 211: Foundations for Calculus  Honors 



E. Analytic Trigonometry 

1. Trigonometric identities 

2. Trigonometric equations 

3. Trigonometric formulas 

4. Law of Sines, Law of Cosines 

5. Vectors 

F. Systems of Equations and Inequalities 

1. Linear systems of two and three variables 

2. Systems of inequalities 

3. Linear programming (optional) 

4. Matrices and matrix operations 

5. Matrix applications, determinants 

G. Topics in Analytic Geometry 

1. Parabolas 

2. Hyperbolas 

3. Ellipses 

4. Polar coordinates and polar graphs (optional) 

VI. General Education Goals and Learning Outcomes 

1. Education Goal: 

The student will develop strategies to analyze and solve math problems of 

two variables, graphically and algebraically (relates to Gen. Ed. Goals 1.a, 

1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g.). 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Identify functional relationships between two variables, both 

graphically and algebraically 

 Identify the characteristics of the conic sections, both graphically and 

algebraically 

2. Education Goal: 

The student will develop the ability to apply geometric and algebraic skills 

quantitatively to trigonometric functions (relates to Gen. Ed. Goals 5.a. 

and 5.d.). 



Learning Outcome: 



3 12/04/02 







MATH 211: Foundations for Calculus  Honors 



The student will be able to: 



 Specify the graphical and algebraic characteristics of polynomial, 

rational, radical, exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions. 

3. Education Goal: 

The student will develop the ability to apply mathematical modeling to 

problems in selected areas of the sciences (relates to Gen. Ed. Goal 6.c. 

and 7.d.) 



Learning Outcome: 



The student will be able to: 



 Employ mathematical modeling techniques to solve problems using 

polynomial, rational, radical, exponential, logarithmic, and 

trigonometric functions. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

Instructors can use a variety of modes including, but not limited to the 
following: 



 lecture/discussion 

 small-group work 

 computer-assisted instruction 

 student oral presentations 

 student collaboration 

 independent study 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

Student learning outcomes are assessed using a combination of the following: 



 tests 

 final examination 

 projects 

 quizzes 

IX. Grade Determinants 

4 12/04/02 







MATH 211: Foundations for Calculus  Honors 



Final grades are determined by a combination of tests, quizzes, homework, 

projects, labs, and final exam. Individual instructors are free to use the 
above in 

any combination. The final exam should be cumulative and should reflect all 
of 

the learning outcomes listed above. 



X. Texts and Materials 

Textbook: Precalculus with Limits, a Graphing Approach 3nd ed. Larson, 

R.E., Hostetler, R. P.,  Edwards, B. H. Houghton Mifflin, 2001 



Required technology: A graphing calculator is required of all students. 

The TI83 is recommended. 



XI. Resources 

No additional resources are needed. 



XII. Honors Courses 

1. Precalculus (Honors) is an accelerated course in precalculus. It contains 

the material from both Math 112: Precalculus I and Math 113: Precalculus 

II. This is a one semester course that contains two semesters worth of 

material. 

2. See detailed Educational Goals and Student Learning Outcome in section 

VI. 

3. This is an existing honors course that has been approved by the 

Curriculum Committee. It contains the material covered in MATH 112 

and Math 113. It is designed for students who wish to complete a two-

semester precalculus sequence in one semester. 

5 12/04/02 






