            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.





11/19/03                                         Page 1 of 6

                              

                              

I. Basic Course Information



     A. Course Number and Title:  MATH 104

       The Mathematics of Music

     

     B. Date of Proposal:  October 2003

     

     C. Sponsoring Department:  Mathematics

     

     D. Semester Credit Hours:  3.0

     

     E.  Weekly Contact Hours:                     Lecture:

     3.0

                                   Laboratory: 0

     

     F.  Prerequisites:    MATH-023 (Algebra Mod 2) or

       successful score on the

                placement test and at least one year of

       high school algebra.



     G. Laboratory Fees: none

     

     H. Dept. Chair:   Dr Nora Thornber,

     nthornberaritanval.edu



II.  Catalog Description



     Prerequisite: Algebra Mod 2, or a satisfactory score on

     placement test.

     This course is designed for those students seeking an

     Associates of Applied Science Degrees in Early

     Childhood Education, Law Enforcement, Education

     Paraprofessionals, or other non-transfer Associates

     Degrees or certificates. Emphasis is placed on a

     conceptual understanding and appreciation of the power

     of mathematics as illustrated by integrating the study

     of mathematical concepts with the physics of music.

     Topics include early numeration systems, operations and

     number patterns, algebra and trigonometry, mathematical

     reasoning, science of sound and its relationship to

     various musical styles.



III.  Statement of Course Need

  

     This course is to replace the existing Contemporary

     Mathematics Course.  Historically, the majority of the

     students taking this course were people seeking

     terminal Associates Degrees in CIS, Law Enforcement or

     Early Childhood Education.  Thus, the curriculum for

     Contemporary Mathematics was a conglomerate of subject

     matter geared to the computer world such as Euler and

     Hamiltonian circuits, bin packaging and project

     scheduling, and subject matter geared to the education

     world such as tiling, patterns, and geometric

     figurations.  Due to changes in pre-requisites for CIS

     majors, they are no longer required to take this

     course.  Thus, there has been a call to change the

     curriculum to better suit the needs and learning

     objectives of the remaining students requiring a math

     course with a pre-requisite of Elementary Algebra.

     

IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum



  A.  Check the item(s) applicable to this course:

         Free elective (This applies automatically to all credit

       courses in the College.)

    The course meets a mathematics requirement in the non-

transfer Early Childhood Education degree program and other

non-transfer degrees or certificates.

  

  B. Course transferability: This course was not designed

                    for transfer, though some

                    institutions may choose to accept this

                    course for transfer credit.

V. Outline of Course Content

     

     This   course   teaches  fundamental   mathematics   by

     integrating music, physics, and history.  The course is

     an  integrated study of the development of  mathematics

     and  the  application of mathematical concepts  to  the

     physics of music. The mathematical concepts are used to

     develop  and understand the musical scale. The  physics

     of  sound  and  of  vibrating strings help  to  explain

     harmony.   The  program will help  students  build  the

     mathematics foundation necessary to understand  algebra

     and  appreciate  diverse musical  forms.  Overall,  the

     program teaches students the relationship between  math

     and  the world around them providing them with in-depth

     accounts  of  the origins and purposes of  mathematics.

     The topics include but are not limited to:

     

     A.   Basic Number Training

       1.   Operations

2.   Speed math

     B.   Exploring Numbers

       1.   Tallies

2.   Ancient numbers

3.   Abacus

4.   Duplation

5.   Prime numbers

     C.   Spaces and Shapes

       1.   Area

2.   Angles and triangles

3.   Pythagorean Theorem

     D.   Science of Music

       1.   Physics of sound

2.   Physics of music

3.   Mechanics of hearing

     E.

       Mathematics of Music

       1.   Ratios

2.   Musical scales

3.   Harmony in music

     F.   Journeys in Music

       1.   Music around the world

2.   Music through time

     

VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes

     

     General Education Goals

     

     The student will:

     

     1)   Produce works that reflect critical and creative

          thought

     

     2)   Communicate and collaborate with others in a clear,

          logical manner



     3)   Use technological tools for research, information

          analysis, problem solving, decision making, and creative

          production



     4)   Develop an interdisciplinary perspective as a means of

          understanding issues, recognizing that the boundaries

          between disciplines are artificial



     7)   Apply quantitative reasoning to interpret data and

     solve problems

  

  Student Learning Outcomes

   

  The student will be able to:



  A.Demonstrate an understanding of the history of ancient

     number systems as the basis for understanding our

     current system of numeration.

  B.Demonstrate how an abacus is used for mathematical

     operations in base 10, base 5 and base 2 numbers.

  C.Demonstrate adding/subtracting/multiplying/dividing

     rational expressions and demonstrate how these ratios

     are used to create harmony in vibrating strings.

  D.Explain the creation, and identify the types and

     physical properties of sound waves.

  E.Calculate and use ratios to prepare for trigonometry

     and other applications, such as scale models, scales on

     maps, and to understand how the notes of the musical

     scale are related.

  F.Demonstrate how ratios and rational expressions are

     used in modern musical notation including time

     signatures.



VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning



     Given the goals and outcomes described above, the

     following formats, modes, and methods for teaching and

     learning are appropriate to the course:

           lecture/discussion

    small-group work

    laboratory

    computer-assisted instruction

    student oral presentations

    student collaboration

       

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments

     

     Given the outcomes described above, the following

     assessment methods will be used:

           laboratory activities

    research papers

    demonstrations

    textbook assignments

    project reports

    computer activities/assignments

     

IX. Grade Determinants



     The following will be used to determine the students

     final grade:

           Homework assignments

    Lab reports/projects on results from working with

computer programs and problem solving activities

    Term paper connecting mathematics and music

    Tests

    Final exam



X.  Texts and Materials



     Some or all of the following types of course materials

     may be used.

           Textbook: Math  Music, by Lawrence B. Bangs

    Student Guide: Math  Music, by Lawrence B. Bangs,

Wildridge Software, Inc., 2000

    Math Workbook: Math  Music, by Lawrence B. Bangs,

Wildridge Software, Inc., 2000

    CD-ROM: Math  Music, by Lawrence B. Bangs, Wildridge

Software, Inc., 2001

    Various Web sources

    Manipulatives

    Alternative Texts:

              Math and Music: Harmonious Connections, by Trudi Hammel

            Garland and Charity Vaughan Kahn, Dale Seymour Publications,

            1995.

    Temperament: The Idea that Solved Musics Greatest

Riddle, by Stuart Isacoff, Alfred A. Knopf, 2001.

    Emblems of Mind: The Inner Life of Music and

Mathematics, by Edward Rothstein, Avon Books, 1995.



XI. Resources



     This course will require use of a computer lab for at

     least half of the time allotted.
