            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



1



              RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE

                   ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE

                              

   MATH 100 FINITE MATHEMATICS (FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS)

                              



I.   Basic Course Information

     

     A.      Course Number and Title:

          Finite Mathematics (For Business Applications)

     

     B.   Date of Revision:        September 2001, updated April

     2002

     

     C.   Sponsoring Department:   Mathematics

     

     D.   Semester Credit Hours:   3

     

     E.   Weekly Contact Hours:    Lecture  3

                              

     F.     Prerequisites:            Intermediate  Algebra,

     Algebra Mod 4, or

                                 satisfactory    score    on

     placement test

     

     G.   Laboratory Fees:         None

     

     H.      Dept.    Chair           Dr.   Nora    Thornber

     (nthornberaritanval.edu)

     

     

II.  Catalog Description

     

     This  course  is  designed for  students  in  business.

     Emphasis is placed on computational skills, ideas,  and

     problem  solving  rather than on  mathematical  theory.

     Topics  include systems of equations, matrices,  linear

     programming, probability, statistics, and finance.



     

III. Statement of Course Need



     Finite  Mathematics  (For  Business  Applications)   is

     designed  as  a  transfer  course  for  students  in  a

     business curriculum.  RVCC currently does not have such

     a  course on this topic available for students to take,

     and this course would fill that need.

     





IV.  Place of Course in College Curriculum



     A.   This   course  satisfies  the  General   Education

          requirements in Mathematics and Science.



     B.   Degree program, option, or certificate requirement

          (specify program, option, or certificate):

     

          Applied Finite Math would also be appropriate  for

          AS  and AAS business programs and for certain  AAS

          technology programs in CIS.

     

     C.   Free Elective



     D.   Course transferability:  This course is designed

          to be similar to equivalent courses in business

          programs at transfer colleges and should help with

          the transfer of some AAS programs.





V.   General Education Goals



     To develop the ability to think clearly

     

     To develop the ability to communicate effectively

     

     To  collect,  organize,  and  evaluate  information  to

     address different kinds of problems

          

     To develop the ability to reason quantitatively

     

     To  develop an understanding of fundamental principles,

     concepts, and methods of the sciences.

     

          

VI   Student Learning Outcomes



     The student will be able to

     

     A.   Find the break-even point in producing and selling

          items

B.   Find the line of best fit for a set of data points

C.   Maximize investment returns

D.   Find how much of each material to use to minimize the

production cost of an item

E.   Find the monthly payments on a loan taken out to

purchase a house

F.   Find the probability that the number of items produced

in a given week lies between certain limits, given the

average number produced and the variance of the number of

items produced





VII. Outline of Course Content



     Simplified  but  realistic versions of applications  to

     real-world  models  are  presented.   Emphasis  is   on

     computational skills, ideas, and problem solving rather

     than  mathematical theory.  The topics include but  are

     not limited to:

     

     A.   Systems of Linear Equations (Including a Review of

          Linear Equations)

          1.   Matrices

2.   Matrix algebra

     B.   Linear Programming

          1.   Geometric approach

2.   Simplex method

     C.   Finance

          1.   Various types of interest

2.   Annuities

3.   Amortization

4.   Applications

     D.   Counting Techniques

          1.   Sets, elements

2.   Permutations, combinations

3.   The Binomial Theorem

     E.   Probability

          1.   Properties of probability

2.   Conditional probability, Independence

3.   Expected Value

     F.   Statistics

          1.   Data organization

2.   Measures of Central Tendency

3.   Measures of Dispersion

4.   The Normal Distribution, Random Variables

     H.   Markov Chains (optional)





VIII.     Suggested Materials



     A.   Textbook:

          Finite  Mathematics, An Applied  Approach,  Eighth

     Edition,

          by Abe Mizrahi and Michael Sullivan, John Wiley  

          Sons, Inc., 2000, ISBN 0-471-32202-4

          

     B.   Materials or equipment:



          Scientific calculator required.



     
