            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 





MATH 110 STATISTICS I 





I. Basic Course Information 

A. Course Number and Title: MATH 110 Statistics I 

B. New or Modified Course: Modified 

C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2008 

D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 

E. Semester Credit Hours: 3 

F. Weekly Contact Hours: 3 Lecture: 3 

Laboratory: 0 

G. Prerequisites: MATH 030 Intermediate Algebra, or 

MATH 025 Algebra Mod 4 Rational  Radical Behavior, 

or appropriate score on math placement test. 

H. Laboratory Fees: None 

I. Department Chair: Siham Alfred, salfredraritanval.edu 

II. Catalog Description 

Prerequisites: MATH 030 Intermediate Algebra, or MATH 025 Algebra Mod 4, 

or appropriate score on math placement test. This is a first course in 
statistics that 

introduces the student to the methods and uses of statistical research. 
Topics 

include descriptive displays and analysis, classical probability, the normal 

distribution, the sampling distribution of the mean, inferences concerning 
means, 

p-values, independence and goodness of fit tests. 



III. Statement of Course Need 

This course is required for programs in Biology, Biotechnology, 
Environmental 

Science, General Business, General Science, Health Science, 
Pre-Chiropractic, 

Pre-Occupational Therapy, Pre-Pharmacy, Pre-Physical Therapy, Pre-Physicians 

Assistant. This course also serves as a prerequisite for MATH 111 Statistics 
II. 



IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 

OAA/je 1 



4/11/2008 





A. This course serves is a free elective and as a mathematics elective for 
all 

programs. 

B. This course serves as a General Education course in Mathematics. 

C. This course meets a program requirement for various degree programs in 

Biology, Biotechnology, Environmental Science, General Business, General 

Science, Health Science, Pre-Chiropractic, Pre-Occupational Therapy, Pre-

Pharmacy, Pre-Physical Therapy, Pre-Physicians Assistant. 

D. This course will transfer as a mathematics course in most liberal arts 

programs. 

V. Outline of Course Content 

A. The Nature of Statistics 

B. Organizing Data 

1. Grouping Data 

2. Histograms and other graphs 

3. Stem and Leaf Diagrams 

C. Descriptive Measures for Univariate Data 

1. Summation Notation 

2. Measures of Central Tendency 

3. Measure of Dispersion 

4. Interpretation of Standard Deviation and Chebychevs theorem 

5. Grouped Data Formulas 

6. Quartiles and Box-and-Whisker Diagrams 

7. Parameters and Statistics 

D. Probability 

1. Classical Probability 

2. Rules of Probability 

3. Mutually Exclusive Events 

4. Conditional Probability 

5. Independent Events 

E. Discrete Random Variables 

1. Probability Distributions 

2. The Mean and Standard Deviation of Discrete Random Variables 

3. Bernoulli Trials and Binomial Coefficients 

4. The Binomial Distribution 

F. The Normal Distribution 

1. From Discrete to Continuous Random Variables 

2. The Standard Normal Curve 

3. Finding Areas Under the Normal Curve 

4. Normally Distributed Random Variables 

OAA/je 2 



4/11/2008 





G. The Sampling Distribution of the Mean 

1. Random Sample and Sampling Error 

2. The Mean and Standard Deviation of the Sample Mean 

3. The Central Limit Theorem 

H. Estimation 

1. Point and Interval Estimation of a Parameter 

2. Constructing Confidence intervals for Population Means and 

Proportions 

3. The t-Distribution 

4. Sample Size Considerations 

I. Hypothesis Testing 

1. The Logic of Significance Tests  classical and p-value methods 

2. Tests for Single Means 

3. Tests for Proportions 

4. The Chi-Square Distribution 

5. Tests for goodness-of-fit 

6. Type I and Type II Errors 

VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 

A. General Education Goals 

Students will: 



1. apply mathematical arguments to problems. (G. E. 1) 

2. solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (G. E. 7) 

B. Learning Outcomes 

Students will be able to: 



1. Use descriptive methods of statistics for the purpose of organizing 

and summarizing data. 

2. Interpret the meaning of summary measures (mean, median, mode, 

standard deviation, variance, quartile, percentile, range, minimum, 

maximum, outlier, etc.) within the context of problem. 

3. Calculate the probability of an event using both discrete and 

continuous methods. 

4. Use methods of inferential statistics to interpret data for the 

purposes of interval estimation in means and proportions. 

5. Use methods of inferential statistics to interpret data for the 

purposes of decision-making in hypothesis tests, including single 

means, proportions, and chi-square procedures. 

OAA/je 3 



4/11/2008 





6. Interpret a p-value within the context of the problem. 

VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 

A. lecture/discussion 

B. small-group work 

C. computer-assisted instruction 

D. guest speakers 

E. laboratory 

F. student oral presentations 

G. student collaboration 

H. independent study 

I. homework 

VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 

A. teacher written tests 

B. computer/calculator lab projects 

C. semester projects 

D. final examination 

E. in-class quizzes 

IX. Grade Determinants 

A. tests 

B. quizzes 

C. homework 

D. projects 

E. labs 

F. cumulative final exam 

X. Texts and Materials 

A. Suggested textbook: Introductory Statistics, Alternate Windows Version, 

(latest edition). Neil A. Weiss. Pearson Addison-Wesley. 

B. Computer-based sources: The instructor is free to choose the type of 

technology. Choices include but are not limited to: 

1. MINITAB 

2. TI-84 graphing calculator 

3. EXCEL 

4. SAS 

Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course 
content and 

resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC 
Bookstore 

is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 



OAA/je 4 



4/11/2008 





XI. Resources 

Because of the technology used in the course, classes should be held in a 
CATT 

room where the instructor can access both MINITAB and the web. MINITAB 

software needs to be available in S020, the open lab, and any other computer 
lab 

where students may be working. 



OAA/je 5 



4/11/2008 




