            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
ACADEMIC COURSE OUTLINE 


MATH 116H INTRODUCTION TO LIMITS – HONORS 


I. Basic Course Information 
A. Course Number and Title: MATH 116H Introduction to Limits - Honors 
B. New or Modified Course: Modified 
C. Date of Proposal: Spring 2008 
D. Sponsoring Department: Mathematics 
E. Semester Credit Hours: 1 
F. 
Weekly Contact Hours: 1 Lecture: 1 
Laboratory: 0 
G. 
Corequisites: MATH 112 Precalculus I, or 
MATH 113 Precalculus II, or 
MATH 114H: Precalculus Honors 
H. Laboratory Fees: None 
I. Department Chair: Siham Alfred, salfred@raritanval.edu 
II. Catalog Description 
Corequisite: MATH 112 Precalculus I, or MATH 113 Precalculus II, or MATH 
114H: Precalculus Honors. This course is designed as an honors component to 
supplement existing courses at the precalculus level. The course is intended to 
provide students with exposure to relevant ideas for future courses in Calculus. 
Topics include intuitive concept of the limit of a function, introduction to the delta 
epsilon definition, limits at infinity, continuity, and the Intermediate Value 
Theorem. 

III. Statement of Course Need 
Honors courses in mathematics were developed to provide mathematically 
talented students the opportunity to obtain a level of rigor not currently available 
in existing courses. Topics in this course were selected to supplement and enrich 
the curriculum of precalculus courses by providing additional theory and 
applications of the fundamental concept of limit as it was used by Newton and 
Leibniz in the development of calculus. This course has been designed as an 
additional one credit component to the existing precalculus courses. 

OAA/je 
1 

4/2/2008 


IV. Place of Course in College Curriculum 
A. Free Elective: This course serves as a one credit free math elective for all 
programs. 
B. Course transferability: This course transfers as a math course in most liberal 
arts programs. 
V. Outline of Course Content 
A. 
Intuitive and Formal Definition of the Limit of a Function 
B. 
Limits of Functions: Polynomials, Rational, Radical and Trigonometric 
C. 
Multi-representation of Limits: Numerical, Graphical, and Algebraic 
D. 
One Sided Limits and Limits at Infinity 
E. 
Properties of Limits and their Proofs 
F. 
Application of Limits: Continuity 
VI. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes 
A. Educational Goals 
Students will: 

1. 
apply mathematical arguments to problems. (G. E. 1) 
2. 
solve problems quantitatively and symbolically. (G. E. 7) 
B. Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to: 

1. 
prove one or more properties of limits of functions. 
2. 
define the limit of a function at a point both intuitively and 
formally. 
3. 
evaluate the limit of a polynomial, rational, radical, and 
trigonometric function. 
4. 
find the limit of a function numerically, graphically, and 
algebraically 
5. 
evaluate one-sided limits, two-sided limits, and limits at infinity. 
6. 
state the relationship between continuity and the limit of a function 
at a point. 
7. 
solve application problems that require the concept of a limit. 
VII. Modes of Teaching and Learning 
The following are appropriate to the course and may be included 

A. Lecture/discussion 
B. Small-group work 
OAA/je 
2 

4/2/2008 


C. Graphing Calculator assisted instruction 
D. Student oral presentations 
E. Student Collaboration 
F. 
Independent study 
VIII. Papers, Examinations, and other Assessment Instruments 
A. Teacher written exams 
B. In-Class quizzes 
C. Labs and/or Projects 
D. Student Oral Presentation 
E. Final examination 
IX. Grade Determinants 
A. Tests 
B. 
Quizzes 
C. Projects 
D. 
Laboratory products 
E. 
Homework 
F. Final exam 
X. 
Texts and Materials 
The following text and materials are required for the course: 

A. Suggested Textbook: 
Precalculus by Blitzer, published by Pearson 
Prentice Hall 
B. Graphing calculator is required. TI-84 is recommended. 
Please Note: The course outline is intended only as a guide to course content and 
resources. Do not purchase textbooks based on this outline. The RVCC Bookstore 
is the sole resource for the most up-to-date information about textbooks. 

XI. Resources 
No additional resources are needed. 

XII. Honors Course 
A. Educational Goals and Learning Outcomes: 
See detailed Educational Goals 
and Student Learning Outcomes in Section VI. 
B. Honors Content: 
This is a one-credit honors course designed to supplement 
topics in MATH 112 Precalculus I, MATH 113 Precalculus II or MATH 
114H Precalculus Honors. 
OAA/je 
3 

4/2/2008 


C. Grade Determinants for Honors Work: See Section IX. 
OAA/je 4 

4/2/2008 


