            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College CS 252 Course Syllabus



CS 252 Advanced Java Concepts: Course credits 3:0:3, Prerequisite: CS 251



Contact Karen Mattison (856) 351-2672, kmattisonsalemcc.edu



Course Description:Continues discussion of object-oriented programming using 
the Java programming language. 

Topics to be explored include improving class design through inheritance, 
developing abstract classes, building 

graphical user interfaces, handling errors and exceptions, and designing 
applications. Place in College Curriculum: This 

course is required for the Computer Science program. It may be taken as a 
3-credit Computer Science elective or 3-credit 

Open Elective in all other programs.

Course Performance Objective 1: The student will demonstrate mastery of 
fundamental object-oriented programming 

syntax, control structures, and tools.

Course Performance Objective 2: The student will design classes that can be 
maintained and updated efficiently. 

Course Performance Objective 3: The student will improve program structure 
through inheritance. 

Course Performance Objective 4: The student will create projects that use 
advanced abstraction. 

Course Performance Objective 5: The student will build a project that 
includes a graphical user interface. 

Course Performance Objective 6: The student will develop projects that can 
handle errors. 

Course Performance Objective 7: The student will apply standard 
methodologies to the process of designing an 

application.

General Education Requirements: The general education goals covered in CS252 
are critical thinking and problem 

solving, quantitative skills, and science  technology.

General Outcomes Assessment: A college-wide outcomes assessment program has 
been put into place to enhance the 

quality and effectiveness of the curriculum and programs at Salem Community 
College.  As part of this assessment 

program, the learning outcomes for this course will be assessed.  Assessment 
methods may include tests, quizzes, 

papers, reports, projects and other instruments.  Copies of all outcomes 
assessments are available in an electronic 

assessment bank maintained by the Institutional Research and Planning 
Office. 

Required Text(s): Barnes, D. J.,  Klling, M. (2006). Objects First with Java 
(3 ed.). Harlow, England: Pearson 

Education Limited.

Materials/Supplies: Flash drive, notebook, pen/pencil, index cards 
Additional Costs: As necessitated by the required 

materials

Course Activities: Classroom activities will include informal lectures and 
demonstrations introducing new course material, 

discussion and review of assigned work and observed processes, development 
of CRC cards, and exams. 

Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: Please refer to the instructors 
syllabus addendum for specific 

information regarding the course requirements and means of evaluation.

Course Content Outline:

I.Review of fundamentals II. Class design III. Inheritance IV. Abstraction 
V. Graphical user interfaces 

VI. Error handling VII. Application design


