            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College CS 251 Course Syllabus



 CS 251 Introduction to Java Programming: Course credits 3:0:3, 
Prerequisite: Completion of ENG 98 and MA 93 if 

required. 



Contact Karen Mattison (856) 351-2672, kmattisonsalemcc.edu



Course Description:Introduces a basic discussion of object-oriented 
programming using the Java programming 

language. The development of Java building blocks takes an objects first 
approach focusing on data types, variables, 

arithmetic expressions, conditional statements, loops, collections, and the 
Java class library. Place in College 

Curriculum: This course is required for the Computer Science program. It may 
be taken as a 3-credit Computer Science 

elective or 3-credit Open Elective in all other programs.

Course Performance Objective 1: The student will create and manipulate 
objects of an existing class. 

Course Performance Objective 2: The student will modify an existing class.

Course Performance Objective 3: The student will create a project in which 
the definition of one class will create and use 

objects of another class.

Course Performance Objective 4: The student will work with groups of 
objects. 

Course Performance Objective 5: The student will demonstrate sophisticated 
programming behavior. 

Course Performance Objective 6: The student will employ a variety of testing 
and debugging tools and techniques. 

Course Performance Objective 7: The student will design classes that can be 
maintained and updated efficiently. 

General Education Requirements: The general education goals covered in CS251 
are critical thinking and problem 

solving, quantitative skills, and science  technology.

Required Text(s): Barnes, D. J.,  Klling, M. (2006). Objects First with Java 
(3 ed.). Harlow, England: Pearson 

Education Limited.

Optional Text(s): NoneMaterials / Supplies: Flash drive, notebook, 
pen/pencil 

Additional Costs: As necessitated by the required materials

General Outcomes Assessment: A college-wide outcomes assessment program has 
been put into place to enhance the 

quality and effectiveness of the curriculum and programs at Salem Community 
College.  As part of this assessment 

program, the learning outcomes for this course will be assessed.  Assessment 
methods may include tests, quizzes, 

papers, reports, projects and other instruments.  Copies of all outcomes 
assessments are available in an electronic 

assessment bank maintained by the Institutional Research and Planning 
Office. 

Course Activities: Classroom activities will include informal lectures and 
demonstrations introducing new course material, 

discussion and review of assigned work and observed processes, and exams.

Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: Please refer to the instructors 
syllabus addendum for specific 

information regarding the course requirements and means of evaluation.

Course Content Outline: 

I. Objects and classes II. Class definitions III. Object interaction: IV. 
Object grouping V. More sophisticated object 

and class behavior VI. Well-behaved objects VII. Class design


