            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College

Course Syllabus



Information Technology 109

Fiber Optic Cabling Systems

Credits:  4.0   Lecture:  2/Laboratory:  4

Pre-Requisites:  Completion of EN 98, EN 99 and MA 93, if

required.

Co-Requisite:  MAT 136, if required

New Course:  Spring 2004



Donna Dobie

Department Co-Chair

Business, Computer  Technical Studies

dobiesalemcc.edu



Course Description:  This course introduces students to fiber

optic cabling systems and their installations. Students will learn

the skills necessary to prepare, handle, terminate, splice, and

test fiber optic cable installations. They will learn the industry

standard wiring methods as outlined by IEEE and FOA. Students will

learn the theory and protocols used in installations. This course

will parallel the industry certification for a Certified Fiber

Optic Technician. This course reinforces the theory with practical

hands-on exercises.



Place in College Curriculum:  spring or fall semester in the first

year of the Telecommunications Cabling Technician Certification

and fall semester in the first year of Communications Technology

AAS degree.



Course Content Outline:

  I.   History of Fiber Optics

       A.   Optical Telephone

B.   First Generation Single Mode

C.   Newer Generations

  II.  Basics of Fiber Optics

       A.   Fiber Manufacture

B.   Fiber Applications

C.   Fiber Performance

  III. Fiber Optic Networks

       A.   Economics

B.   Fiber Vs. Copper

C.   Future Installations

  IV.  Optical Fiber Cabling

       A.   Construction

B.   Cable Choices

C.   National Electric Code

  V.   Specifications for Optical Fiber Cabling

       A.   Cable Parameters

B.   Installation specifications

C.   Environmental Specifications

D.   Future Proofing Systems

E.   Design Shortcuts

  VI.  Connectors, Splices, and Tools

       A.   Fiber Joints

B.   Attenuation

C.   Connectors

D.   Splices

E.   Tools

F.   Hardware

  VII. Fiber Optic Design and Installation

       A.   Current Market

B.   Overseeing Installations

C.   Pricing

D.   General Guidelines

E.   Cable Guidelines

F.   Connector Guidelines

G.   Cable Plant Passive Component Loss

H.   Equipment Link Loss

  VIII.     Installation Safety

       A.   Bare Fiber Safety

B.   Safety Rules

C.   Other Safety Considerations

  IX.  Planning the Installation

       A.   Planning Process

B.   Measuring Conduit Pulls

C.   Splicing

D.   Terminations

E.   Efficient Pulls

F.   Duct Space

G.   Initial Plant Layout

  X.   Fiber Optic Plant Documentation

       A.   Record Keeping

B.   The document Process

C.   Securing Records

  XI.  Estimating and Bidding Jobs

       A.   Estimating

B.   Skills

C.   Tools

D.   Site Visit

E.   Estimating Process

  XII. Fiber Optic Cable Pulling

       A.   Despooling Cable

B.   Pulling Force

C.   Bending Fiber

D.   Interference

E.   Procedures for Pulling Cable

F.   Holding Cable for Stripping

  XIII.     Fiber Optic Restoration

       A.   Proactive Plant

B.   Reactive Restorations

C.   Identifying the Problem

D.   Restoring Services

E.   Storage Loops

F.   Emergency Restorations

G.   Single Mode Network Restorations

  XIV. Fiber Optic Testing

       A.   Optical Power

B.   Optical Fiber Testing

C.   Connector and Splice Loss Testing

D.   Cable Plant Installation Testing

E.   Coupler and Switch Testing

F.   Data link Testing



Course Performance and Enabling Objectives



Enabling Objectives for all Sections: Students will understand and

be able to adhere to the safety procedures specified in every lab.

Students will search for products and company information via the

web as needed in the lab assignments. They will find URLs needed

for any given application/specification. They will use search

strings in the product knowledge base to configure and

troubleshoot products (software and hardware), and use listserv

groups to enhance their knowledge of any given subject. They will

be able to locate patches for products, download, and apply the

patches. Students will use on-line and paper manuals to set up and

use products. Students will also search the web via browsers to

locate URLs that provide additional information about products and

specifications. Students, reinforcing and complementing all

assignments inside and outside the classroom, will regularly seek

out the information on the web. (IL)



I History of Fiber Optics



     Performance Objectives:

     1. Recite the history and describe the major events of the

     development of fiber optics

     

     Enabling Objectives:

     1. Recite and list the major historic events of fiber optic

development

     2. Recite and list the major historic events of single-mode

fiber

     3. List the major players in the history of fiber optics

development

     4. Recite the recent developments in the next generation of

fiber optics



II. Basics of Fiber Optics

  

     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Describe how fiber optic data links work.

     2.   Describe how the fiber is able to transmit the optical

      signals.

3.   Describe what types of fiber are available and how they

differ what causes loss in fiber and how the bandwidth is limited

in each type of fiber.

  

     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   Define optical fiber as a medium

2.   Describe the fiber optic signal

3.   List the major advantage of fiber optic

4.   Describe the three elements of an optical fiber data link

(light source, fiber, and light detector).

5.   Identify the core, cladding, and buffer coating of the cable.

6.   Define single mode and multimode fiber.

7.   List the typical specifications for each fiber type.

8.   Define and describe the three methods used to fabricate

fiber: modified chemical vapor deposition (MCVC), outside vapor

deposition (OVD), and vapor axial deposition (VAD).

9.   Associate each type of fiber with its specific application.

10.  Describe how purity and imperfection affect fiber

performance.

11.  Describe the two factors (absorption and scattering) of fiber

attenuation.

12.  Define modal dispersion, chromatic dispersion, and their

effects on fiber bandwidth.

       

III. Fiber Optic Networks

     

     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Describe various types of fiber optic networks.

2.   Describe how fiber optics networks can replace cooper

networks.



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   Describe fiber optic network usage in telephony.

2.   Describe fiber optic network usage in CATV.

3.   Describe fiber optic network usage in LANs.

4.   Compare and contrast fiber vs. cooper applications in

networks.

5.   List the criteria for comparing fiber against copper

installation.

6.   Contrast fiber and UTP cabling.



IV. Optical Fiber Cabling

     

     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Describe the cabling types and their appropriateness to

       specific installations.

2.   Describe and detail each type of cabling including

specifications for each cable type.



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   Diagram the layers of (1) tight buffered fiber optic cable

       (2) loose-tube fiber optic cable (3) ribbon fiber optic cable.

2.   List the different types of cabling jackets and each

environment appropriate for the jackets.

3.   List the type of jacket suitable for IEEE-383, 1974.

4.   List the industrial standard for each of the following fiber

cables:

       Simplex cable

       Zipcord cable

       Tightpack cable

       Breakout cable

       Amored loose-tube cable

     5.   Describe the composition of each type of above named cable.

6.   List the factors to be considered with choosing cable.

7.   List the guidelines for composite cables

8.   List the guidelines for fiber cable trays specifically

vertical installations.

9.   List the guidelines for conduits.

10.  List the guidelines for buried cable.

11.  List the guidelines for aerial installation

12.  Describe how blown-in fiber is installed.

13.  List the NEC (National Electric Code) ratings for fiber.

14.  List the requirements of article 770.



       

V. Specifications for Optical Fiber Cabling

     

     Performance Objectives:

     1.   List the cable parameters and typical values for

       installations.

2.   Describe environmental factors in installations.



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   List the specifications for the maximum recommended

       installation loads for raceway, conduit multifiber, direct burial,

       lashed aerial, and self-supporting cables. (kg-force, pounds-

       force, or N)

2.   Describe how to determine the minimum recommended

installation bend radius.

3.   List the 21 environmental specifications and how each of

these specifications is measured.

4.   List the ways an installation can be future-proof

5.   Describe how the choice of multimode vs. singlemeode fiber

installations affect design shortcuts in indoor, outdoor, fiber

performance, and cable performance.



VI. Fiber Optic connectors, splices, and tools

  

     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Identify the various connectors used with fiber cabling

2.   Identify the criteria for splicing fiber cabling.

3.   List the tools used for fiber splicing and connectorization.

4.   Describe how the tools are used.

5.   Detail the purpose of hardware

6.   List the rules and specifications in determining indoor

hardware

7.   Identify the hardware used in indoor installations



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   Define a fiber joint.

2.   Describe the factors in fiber joints that cause attenuation

3.   List parameters in splice losses.

4.   Describe back reflection/reflectance

5.   List the 5 major connector categories and identify the

connectors in each category

6.   List the criteria for choosing a fiber connector.

7.   Describe and demonstrate installation procedures for

installing a fiber connector onto a fiber.

8.   Describe and demonstrate the stripping process.

9.   Describe and demonstrate the cleaning process

10.  Describe and demonstrate the cleaving process.

11.  Describe and demonstrate how adhesives are used.

12.  List the various adhesives that are used

13.  Describe and demonstrate the end-face techniques (flat, PC-

comed, and Angled-PC and how each is done.

14.  Describe fusion splicing

15.  Describe mechanical splicing

16.  List the criteria in choosing splicing type.

17.  List the tools used in splicing connectorization and

demonstrate how each is used in the process.

18.  List the four main functions of distribution points as stated

in the EIA.TIA 568 specifications.

19.  Describe each of the distribution points and how it is used

(main cross-connect, intermediate cross-connect, telecom closet

hardware, and telecom outlets)

20.  Describe and demonstrate how each of the following hardware

components is installed in the distribution points: splice panel,

patch panel, wall outlet, panels, pigtail splicing, outside plant

hardware, and conduit.





Section VII. Fiber Optic Design and Installation



     Performance Objective:

     1.   Describe the process of starting a fiber contracting business

2.   List the guidelines for vendors, products, options, and cost

and how each affects decisions.

3.   Describe the process of Link loss Budget analysis







     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   List the steps recommended for analyzing the market.

2.   List the sources for Business.

3.   List the minimum set of tools required.

4.   Describe the process of overseeing a fiber installation,

5.   Explain how inspection impacts installation.

6.   List the requirements of NEC article 770.

7.   Describe the pricing guidelines.

8.   List the guidelines for evaluating vendors.

9.   List the guidelines for evaluating cable.

10.  List the guidelines for connector selection.

11.  Explain the process of link loss budget analysis calculation.

12.  List the steps needed to calculate the loss margin.



VIII. Installation Safety



     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Desire the safety rules for bare fiber.

2.   List the rules for safety

     

     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   List the details of the safety study report in ANSI Z136.2

2.   Describe how to protect yourself from bare fiber.

3.   List the equipment used in bare fiber safety protection.

4.   List the specifications for a safe environment when working

with chemical cleaners and adhesives.

5.   List the general safety rules for working with fiber optic

installations.



IX. Planning the Installation

     

     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Describe and detail the planning process

     

     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   List the three ways to measure the path for conduit pulls.

2.   Describe how each of the measurements is taken.

3.   List the tools used in each of the measurement processes.

4.   Describe the environment needed for fusion and mechanical

splicing.

5.   Describe the environment for terminations.

6.   Explain the efficient pull process.

7.   Describe the environment and limitations in duct spaces.

8.   Detail the initial planning walkout steps.



Section X Fiber Optic Plant Documentation



     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Detail the documentation process for fiber cable plants.

2.   Identify the records needed for the documentation process.



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   List the data that is kept for cable splice and termination

       points, fiber, connection, and paths.

2.   List the major categories of documentation (design, bidding,

installation, testing, troubleshooting, customer acceptance).

3.   Describe the process from basic layout, to preliminary data,

to identifying all hardware paths and locations.

4.   Create a typical cable report form.

5.   Describe how to protect documentation.



XI Estimating and Bidding Jobs



     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Describe the skills needed for estimating.

2.   Describe the tools used in estimating.

     

     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   Detail how each of the following skills is needed for proper

       estimating (mathematics, English language, imagination, on-site

       expenses, and handwriting).

2.   List how the following tools help the estimating process

along: tape recorders, cameras, estimating sheets, and

computerized tools.

3.   Define the purpose of a site visit and the typical

installations already found on site visits.

4.   List the three part estimating process and how to use each

part: takeoff, writing the estimate, and summarizing the estimate

used in estimating.

5.   Define the various labor units and unit hours.

6.   Define how training and overhead affect estimating.



XII Fiber Optic Cable Pulling



     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Describe the various pull methods used in fiber.

2.   List and describe how to avoid pull problems.



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   Describe the consequences of inaccurate measurements splice

       loss, tensile stress, and how bending radius mistakes affect the

       pull.

2.   Detail the process of despooling cable.

3.   List the specifications for pulling force and proper pulling

technique.

4.   Describe pre and post testing procedures and their purpose.

5.   List the pitfalls of interference with other installations.

6.   Detail the procedures for pulling cable in long runs, simplex

and duplex cable, rope pulls, and racking the cable.

7.   Describe how to hold cable for stripping.





XIII Fiber Optic Restoration



     Performance Objectives:

     1.   Detail the proactive planning process versus the reactive

       restoration.

2.   List the issues and reasons for restoration.



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   List the faults as related to patch panels, system related,

       and installation related.

2.   Detail the causes of cable system faults, the equipment used

to test the fault and the resolution to the fault.

3.   Relate the typical LAN failures to each of the fault

categories.

4.   List the equipment used in restoration and describe how each

is used: cleaning kits, optical inspection scope, optical loss

test kit, visual tracers and fault locators, and optical time

domain reflectometer (OTDR).

5.   List the steps use to identify problems.

6.   List the issues in restoring service.

7.   Detail how retrievable slack versus nonretrievable slack

impact restoration.

8.   List the suggested steps for singlemode network restoration.

9.   Describe how having a restoration posture aids in the

restoration process.

10.  List the various considerations in forming this posture.





XIV Fiber Optic Testing



     Performance Objectives:

     1.   List the standard testing procedures in a fiber install.

2.   List the tools used in testing and describe how each is used

and under what circumstances.





     Enabling Objectives:

     1.   Relate each test parameter with the instrument used to test

       the parameter.

2.   Describe the functions of a power meter and detail how it is

used in testing.

3.   Detail how fiber optic test sources must be compatible with

the fiber source.

4.   Detail why sources must have a variety of optic connectors

for testing.

5.   List the functions and detail how to use an optical loss test

kit.

6.   List the functions of and detail how to use an optical time

domain reflectometer.

7.   List the functions of and detail how to use a visual cable

tracer.

8.   Detail how a fiber identifier works to detect signal.

9.   Describe the purpose of an optical continuous wave

reflectometer.

10.  Describe the usage of microscope inspection.

11.   Describe the usage of a fiber optic talkset.

12.  Describe the functions of an attenuator.

13.  Describe how jumper cables and bulkhead slice adapters

establish test conditions.

14.  Describe how to measure optical power.

15.  Describe the process of setting up reference stands to

calibrate fiber optic power measurement.

16.  List the uncertainty measurement for optical power, loss

measurements, and optical return loss measurements.

17.  Describe the function and procedures of continuity testing.

18.  Describe the function and procedures for testing fiber

attenuation.

19.  List the sources for loss measurements.

20.  Describe the factors for understanding modal distribution,

mode control, and attenuation correction and the effects of each.

21.  Describe the problems that cause bending loss.

22.  Describe and demonstrate how an OTDR tests fiber.

23.  Describe the uncertainties in OTDR testing.

24.  Define modal dispersion

25.  Define chromatic dispersion.

26.  Describe how modal dispersion is tested.

27.  Describe how connectors and splices are tested.

28.  List the factors contributing to splice loss.

29.  Describe the FOTP-34 test standard and the three options in

modal distribution.

30.  Describe and demonstrate visual inspection techniques for

connectors.

31.  Define ORL or optical return loss.

32.  Describe how connectorized cable testing is performed in the

field.

33.  Describe and demonstrate how to find bad connectors.

34.  Describe the tests used to measure installed splice loss

35.  Define the largest factor in the uncertainty of multimode

cable loss tests.

36.  Describe the process of choosing a launch cable for testing.

37.  List the ways fiber mismatches occur.

38.  Detail the process of testing the installed fiber optic cable

plant.

39.  List the problems routinely encountered in fiber optic

installations.









Course Activities: Students will spend 1/3 the time in a

lecture/demonstration series presented by the instructor. The

instructor will use the RealCBT learning system for video lectures

and simulations. The instructor will also use circuit boards and

electronic trainers to demonstrate hands-on processes the students

are expected to learn. The other 2/3 of the time the students are

expected to reinforce the things learned in the

lecture/demonstration in a supervised instructor led lab. Students

will use the tools and testing equipment typically found in the

industry to do the hands-on lab portion. This includes using the

Internet to visit the sites of on-line companies and using all

available on-line resources (knowledge bases, on-line videos, on-

line technical support, and on-line product manuals) to complete

assignments.



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:  Fifty percent of the

grade is determined by test grades. Six tests will be given

throughout the semester. Fifty percent of the grade is determined

by lab experiments and homework.



Grading:  Letter Grade    Numerical Value         Grade Points

          A                    93-100                  4.0

          A-                   90-92                   3.7

          B                   88-89                   3.3

          B                    83-87                   3.0

          B-                   80-82                   2.7

          C                   78-79                   2.3

          C                    73-77                   2.0

          C-                   70-72                   1.7

          D                   68-69                   1.3

          D                    63-67                   1.0

          F                   Below 60                  0

          FA                  Below 60                  0

P - Pass:  This grade is given to students who satisfactorily meet

the course requirements in the following types of courses: credit

by exam, educational development courses with code numbers below

100, health practicum courses and co-op courses.  P grades are

not calculated into a students GPA.



I - Incomplete Work: This is a conditional grade given at the

discretion of the faculty member when student emergencies prevent

the completion of all course requirements. The student must

complete all requirements within 30 days after the start of

classes in the following semester or term. If this condition is

not met, the I automatically becomes an F grade.



W-Withdrawal:  This grade signifies official withdrawal from a

course. See details under College Withdrawal.

R-Audit: This is not a grade but indicates a student took the

course for no credit and, therefore, no grade.



Attendance: Students are expected to attend all scheduled classes.

Any student who is absent for Thirty percent of the classes (9

classes) will receive an FA for the course, no exceptions.



Tests: No makeup tests allowed. Students must complete a test on

the test date or arrange to take a test in advance. All tests are

closed book. Anyone cheating will receive a 0 for that test and be

subject to failing the class via submittal to a disciplinary board

of review.



Lab Assignments: Each lab will have the results written in

paragraph format and submitted via email on or before the due

date. All homework/assignments due before class starts on the due

date. Homework and assignments cannot be made up.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an act

of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in this course,

academic probation, and/or suspension from the college. See the

student handbook for additional details.



Student Safety and Procedures: Students are required to follow

procedures for their own safety and the safety of others. Specific

procedures are to be adhered to when working with the equipment.

These procedures will be demonstrated by the instructor, detailed

in handouts and procedures, and are an intricate part of every

lab. Should students have any doubts or questions regarding a

procedure, they should ask the instructor before proceeding.



Software and Hardware Policies: The school is licensed to use all

software required in class and lab. Students will not be allowed

to copy software from the colleges  PCs. It is an illegal act to

copy this software. Viruses can be transmitted through various

media. Students will take every precaution when working with the

schools software and hardware, adhering to the procedures for

protecting from viruses. Students will not bring their own

software to class, nor will they install it on any college PC.

Students are not permitted to play games or download/participate

in instant messaging or chat room in the labs. Students are

permitted to sign out the MSDNAA software related to the IT class

they are enrolled in. See the instructor to find out what software

is available for that class. MSDNAA software can only be signed

out during the first four weeks of classes no software will be

signed out after that. Students will run the risk of dismissal

from the class and the college if found in violation of the

software and hardware policies.



Required Text: Hayes, Jim, Fiber Optics Technicians Manual,

Second Edition, 2001, Delmar Thomson Learning, ISBN 0-7668-1825-X



Material or Supplies: Students will be required to purchase a set

of PC headphones and a computer repair toolkit with grounding

wrist strap. Students will be supplied with additional tools,

software, hardware, and safety equipment required for each lab.

Items necessary to complete each lab will be given out at the

beginning of each lab and returned at the end of each lab.







-----------------------------7d4259ee0382--
