            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.







Salem Community College Course Syllabus



Information Technology 108

Copper Cabling Systems

Credits:  4.0  Lecture 2 / Laboratory 4

Pre-Requisites:  Completion of EN 98, EN 99, and MA 93, if

required.

Co-Requisite:  MAT 136, if required

New Course:  Fall 2003



Donna Dobie

Department Co-Chair

Business, Computer  Technical Studies

dobiesalemcc.edu





Course Description: This course will introduce students to the

properties and theories of copper cabling systems in todays

communications devices. They will learn proper handling and

installation techniques for copper cabling. This course will

provide the theory and background needed to thoroughly understand

and implement copper cabling systems.

This course reinforces the theory with practical hands-on

exercises.



Place in College Curriculum:  spring or fall semester in the

first year of the Telecommunications Cabling Technician

Certification and fall semester in the first year of

Communications Technology AAS degree.



Course Content Outline:

  I.    History of Telecommunications

       A.    Telegraphy

B.    Telephony

C.    Wireless

D.    Computer network

  II.   Technology of Communications

       A.    Telephone

B.    Video Transmission

C.    CATV Networks

  III.  Wire Installations

       A.    Cable

B.    Equipment

C.    Safety

D.    Installation Management

  IV.   Structured Cabling

       A.    Standards

B.    EIA/TIA 568

C.    Fiber Optics

  V.    Telephone Wiring

       A.    Residential

B.    Commercial

C.    Code Requirements

D.    Circuit Protection

E.    Conductors

F.    Components

G.    Second Line

H.    Plan the Installation

I.    Separation and Physical Protection

J.    Safety

K.    Installation Steps

L.    Testing

M.    Install Checklists

  VI.   Video Systems

       A.    Cabling

B.    Installation

C.    Termination

D.    Code Requirements

  VII.  Network Cabling

       A.    Requirements

B.    Types

C.    Wireless

D.    Infrared

E.    Power Line Carrier Networks

F.    NEC Code Typical Installs

G.    Cable Pulling

H.    Closets and Equipment Rooms

  VIII.      Testing Voice, Data, and Video Installs

       A.    Coax Cable Testing

B.    UTP Testing

C.    Wire Mapping

D.    Impedance, Resistance, and Return Loss

E.    Cable Length

F.    NEXT

G.    ACR

H.    Propagation Delay and Skew

I.    Cable Plant Certification Standards

J.    Attenuation

  IX.   Wiring Termination Practices

       A.    Coax

B.    Cat 3 and 5

C.    Connection Block

D.    Mating Cable



Course Performance and Enabling Objectives



Enabling Objectives for all Sections: Students will understand

and be able to adhere to the safety procedures specified in every

lab. Students will search for products and company information

via the web as needed in the lab assignments. They will find URLs

needed for any given application/specification. They will use

search strings in the product knowledge base to configure and

troubleshoot products (software and hardware), and use listserv

groups to enhance their knowledge of any given subject. They will

be able to locate patches for products, download, and apply the

patches. Students will use on-line and paper manuals to set up

and use products. Students will also search the web via browsers

to locate URLs that provide additional information about products

and specifications. Students, reinforcing and complementing all

assignments inside and outside the classroom, will regularly seek

out the information on the web. (IL)



I History of Telecommunications

     

     Performance Objectives:

     1.    Detail the history of telecommunications.

     

     Enabling Objectives:

     1.    Recite and list the major historic events of telegraphy

2.    Recite and list the major historic events for Telephony

3.    Recite and list the major historic events of Wireless Radio

and Television

4.    List the capabilities of UHF and VHF

5.    List the historic events of CATV

6.    Recite and list the major historic events of computer

networks.

7.    Define WWW, LAN.



II. Technology of Communications

      

      Performance Objectives:

      1.    Describe how communications systems work and how they use

        cabling to communicate.

2.    List the terminology used to describe communications

systems.

3.    Describe the installation processes, cabling, and equipment

that make up a communications systems.

      

      Enabling Objectives:

      1.    Describe how telephone communications work.

2.    Describe how CATV cabling systems work.

3.    Describe how computer network cabling systems work.

4.    List the terminology specific to each type of

communications systems (telephone, CATV, computer networks).

5.    Define the types of cabling systems used in telephone,

CATV, and computer networks.

6.    Describe the installations processes unique to each type of

installation

7.    Identify the types of cabling and equipment in a

communications system.

       

III. Wire Installations

   

     Performance Objectives:

     1.    Describe the common telecom equipment and installations of

       today.

   

     Enabling Objectives

     1.    Distinguish between standards and codes.

2.    Define how standards complement safety.

3.    List the general safety standards

4.    List the common types of telecom equipment

5.    List the seven components of a computer network install.

6.    Define the safety procedures for each type of installation.

7.    Demonstrate safety technical in the lab.



IV.  Structured Cabling

     

     Performance Objectives:

     1.    Describe the standard architectures and components used for

       cabling installations.



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.    Define the EIA/TIA 568 standard

2.    List the specifications for EIA/TIA 568

3.    List all the EIA/TIA and TSB standards relating to cabling

networks.

4.    List the distance requirements fore568 cabling.

5.    List the category designations for UTP.

6.    List the layout (pin-out) for UTP cable pairs for 10Base-T,

Token Ring, FDDI, ATM, 100Base and Gigabit Ethernet

7.    Demonstrate the proper technique for making UTP cabling for

100Base-T

8.    Identify RJ-45 connector types

9.    Demonstrate the proper technique for installing connectors

on cabling.

10.   List the two ways to terminate cables (plugs and

punchdowns)

11.   List the types of punchdowns.

12.   Demonstrate the correct procedures for installing

terminations at punchdown blocks.

13.   Identify 568A, 568B, and USOC wiring schematics.

14.   Describe the function of a patch panel.

15.   List the various options in wiring UTP.

16.   Demonstrate the various options by creating the UTP wiring

17.   List the three backbone cables.

18.   Define a home run cabling system.

19.   Define the purpose of the voluntary interoperability

standards.

20.   Define the legal basis of NEC

       

V.   Telephone Wiring

   

     Performance Objectives:

     1.    Detail the installation, code, and testing of  telephone

       wiring systems.



     Enabling Objectives:

     1.    Distinguish between residential and commercial installation

       practices.

2.    Define inside wiring.

3.    Describe the locations and installation of the NI (network

interface)

4.    Describe the function of the NI as the boundary between the

inside wiring and the telecommunications network.

5.    Describe the code requirements outlined in Article 800 of

NEC.

6.    Describe the function of circuit protections.

7.    Identify the major components for communications grounding.

8.    List the types of interior communications conductors.

9.    Describe the characteristics of Class, 1, 2, and 3

conductors.

10.   List the types of inside wiring and the specifications for

2-pair and 3-pair wiring.

11.   List the terminations for 2-pair and 3-pair.

12.   Demonstrate the correct procedures for terminating

telephone wire

13.   Identify modular outlets and RJ-11 vs. RJ-14 jacks and

their usages

14.   Demonstrate proper procedures for outlet installations for

RJ-11 and RJ-14.

15.   List the fastener spacing guidelines.

16.   Describe the standards for a second line install.

17.   Demonstrate a second line install

18.   Describe the standards for a small office install.

19.   List the general rules for planning and performing a

telephone install.

20.   Identity the 25-pair backbone cable color code.

21.   List the safety steps used during installation.

       

VI. Video Systems

     

     Performance Objectives:

     1.    Describe the functions of CCTB and CTAV systems.

2.    Distinguish between the two types of installations.

3.    Detail the installation and coding of a video system.

   

     Enabling Objectives:

     1.    List the common coaxial cable connector types and detail

       the termination process.

2.    List the rules for grounding.

3.    List the rules for routing coaxial circuits.

4.    List the requirements for indoor circuits.

5.    Demonstrate proper techniques when creating coaxial cabling

6.    Define and describe the uses for the cable types CATVP,

CATVR, CATV, CATVX.

7.    List the hierarchy for cable substitutions.

8.    List the detail specification of NEC article 820.

       

VII Network Cabling

       

       Performance Objectives:

       1.    Detail the installation requirements of network cabling.

2.    Detail the various installation types and corresponding

cable specifications.

3.    Define the terminology for network installations.

         

       Enabling Objectives:

       1.    List the cabling requirements for a network based on

         length, signal quality, and environment.

2.    Define attenuation, impedance, crosstalk, and capacitance.

3.    Define the causes of attenuation, impedance, crosstalk, and

capacitance.

4.    List the types of shields to prevent crosstalk.

5.    Define the applications for and disadvantages of UTP, ScTP,

STP, coaxial, and fiber optic cables.

6.    Define wireless transmission.

7.    Define infrared transmission.

8.    Describe power line carrier networks.

9.    Define the class 2 and 3 circuit characteristics.

10.   List the NEC code requirements from article for class 1, 2,

3, 4, remote control, signaling, a and power limited circuits.

11.   List the rules for installation of cat 5 components.

12.   Overview a typical installation of cat 5.

13.   Demonstrate a typical installation of cat 5

14.   Define the various pulling methods for cat 5.

15.   Describe the function of horizontal cable supports.

16.   Describe a closet-to-closet pull.

17.   Describe the various pulls for conduit, trays, raceways,

and riser installations.

18.   List the mounting hardware found in an equipment room or

closet.

19.   Describe the function of fire stopping.



VIII. Testing Voice, Data, and Video Installs

       

       Performance Objectives:

       1.    Describe the testing methods for voice, data, and video

         installs.

2.    List and describe the functions of testing equipments.



       Enabling Objectives:

        1.    List the functions of a DMM (digital multimeter) and

          describe the testing methodology for an open or short.

        2.    Demonstrate testing with a DMM of an opened and a short.

3.    List the functions of a toner (wire mapper).

4.    Describe the importance of wire mapping.

5.    Detail the components of wiremapping.

6.    Detail the test requirements for the various cabling

systems

7.    Demonstrate testing coaxial, RJ-45, and RJ-11 cabling with

a cable tester.

8.    List the pinouts for 568A, 568B, USOC, open DEC.

9.    Define and detail wire map problems: shorts, opens, reverse

pairs, transposed pairs, split pairs.

10.   Describe how TDR (time domain reflectometer) can estimate

the length of cable.

11.   Define NVP (nominal velocity of propagation.

12.   Define attenuation as express in dB (decibels.

13.   Describe the testing methodology for NEXT (near end

crosstalk).

14.   Define attenuation to crosstalk ratio (ACR).

15.   Define Propagation delay and delay skew.

16.   Describe the testing methodology for ACR, and delay.

17.   List the cable plant certification standards.

18.   List the specifications for NEXT and Attenuation.

          

IX. Wiring Termination Practices

        

        Performance Objectives:

        1.    List the proper handling procedures for telephone, LAN,

          CATV, and CCTV networks.

2.    List the tools and materials needed for terminations.

          

        Enabling Objectives:

        1.    Define the functions of a coax stripper and crimper.

2.    Detail the procedures for constructing a coaxial cable

length.

3.    Describe an F connection.

4.    List the tools used for cat 5 cable construction and

installation: cable jacket tripper, punchdown tool, crimp tool,

punchdown block.

5.    Visually identify each of the above listed tools.

6.    Describe the functions of each of the cat 5 tools.

7.    List the procedures for a typical cat 5 cable installation

into a punchdown block, modular  plug, and wall jack.

8.    List the procedures for a typical cat 3 telephone install

into a 66 punchdown block.

9.    Describe the function of a bridge clip.

10.   Demonstrate proper techniques in creating terminations with

strippers and crimpers.





Course Activities: Students will spend 1/3 the time in a

lecture/demonstration series presented by the instructor. The

instructor will use the RealCBT learning system for video

lectures and simulations. The instructor will also use circuit

boards and electronic trainers to demonstrate hands-on processes

the students are expected to learn. The other 2/3 of the time the

students are expected to reinforce the things learned in the

lecture/demonstration in a supervised instructor led lab.

Students will use the tools and testing equipment typically found

in the industry to do the hands-on lab portion. This includes

using the Internet to visit the sites of on-line companies and

using all available on-line resources (knowledge bases, on-line

videos, on-line technical support, and on-line product manuals)

to complete labs as assigned.



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:  Fifty percent of

the grade is determined by test grades. Six tests will be given

throughout the semester. Fifty percent of the grade is determined

by lab experiments and homework.



Grading:  Letter         Numerical Value         Grade Points

Grade

          A                  93-100                   4.0

         A-                   90-92                   3.7

         B                   88-89                   3.3

          B                   83-87                   3.0

         B-                   80-82                   2.7

         C                   78-79                   2.3

          C                   73-77                   2.0

         C-                   70-72                   1.7

         D                   68-69                   1.3

          D                   63-67                   1.0

          F                 Below 60                   0

         FA                 Below 60                   0

P - Pass:  This grade is given to students who satisfactorily

meet the course requirements in the following types of courses:

credit by exam, educational development courses with code numbers

below 100, health practicum courses and co-op courses.  P

grades are not calculated into a students GPA.



I - Incomplete Work: This is a conditional grade given at the

discretion of the faculty member when student emergencies prevent

the completion of all course requirements. The student must

complete all requirements within 30 days after the start of

classes in the following semester or term. If this condition is

not met, the I automatically becomes an F grade.



W-Withdrawal:  This grade signifies official withdrawal from a

course. See details under College Withdrawal.

R-Audit: This is not a grade but indicates a student took the

course for no credit and, therefore, no grade.

Attendance: Students are expected to attend all scheduled

classes. Any student who is absent for Thirty percent of the

classes (9 classes) will receive an FA for the course, no

exceptions.



Tests: No makeup tests allowed. Students must complete a test on

the test date or arrange to take a test in advance. All tests are

closed book. Anyone cheating will receive a 0 for that test and

be subject to failing the class via submittal to a disciplinary

board of review.



Lab Assignments: Each lab will have the results written in

paragraph format and submitted via email on or before the due

date. All homework/assignments due before class starts on the due

date. Homework and assignments cannot be made up.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an act

of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in this course,

academic probation, and/or suspension from the college. See the

student handbook for additional details.



Student Safety and Procedures: Students are required to follow

procedures for their own safety and the safety of others.

Specific procedures are to be adhered to when working with the

equipment. These procedures will be demonstrated by the

instructor, detailed in handouts and procedures, and are an

intricate part of every lab. Should students have any doubts or

questions regarding a procedure, they should ask the instructor

before proceeding.



Software and Hardware Policies: The school is licensed to use all

software required in class and lab. Students will not be allowed

to copy software from the colleges  PCs. It is an illegal act to

copy this software. Viruses can be transmitted through various

media. Students will take every precaution when working with the

schools software and hardware, adhering to the procedures for

protecting from viruses. Students will not bring their own

software to class, nor will they install it on any college PC.

Students are not permitted to play games or download/participate

in instant messaging or chat room in the labs. Students are

permitted to sign out the MSDNAA software related to the IT class

they are enrolled in. See the instructor to find out what

software is available for that class. MSDNAA software can only be

signed out during the first four weeks of classes no software

will be signed out after that. Students will run the risk of

dismissal from the class and the college if found in violation of

the software and hardware policies.



Required Text: Hayes, Jim, Data, Voice, and Video Cabling, 2000,

Delmar Thomson Learning, ISBN 0-7668-0964-1



Material or Supplies: Students will be required to purchase a set

of PC headphones and a Computer Repair Toolkit with grounding

wrist strap. Students will be supplied with additional tools,

software, hardware, and safety equipment required for each lab.

Items necessary to complete each lab will be given out at the

beginning of each lab and returned at the end of each lab.







-----------------------------7d43e0271100e6--
