2



IT 205

Network Systems II

Credits: 4

Pre-Requisites: Pre-Requisites: IT 106, IT102, IT103, IT104,

IT204, and IT105 Network Systems I or written permission of

Instructor

New Course Fall 2002



Donna Dobie

Department Co-Chair: Business, Computer, and Technical Studies

dobiesalemcc.edu



Course Description: This course will teach advanced administration

of a common network operating system. Students will compare and

contrast the operating systems and learn how to integrate them

into a mixed network environment. File server optimization and

security will also be explored in depth. Desktop management

policies will also be explored. A higher-level operating system

(Linux) and its integration into a network will be introduced.





Course Performance Objectives:

     1.   Students will convey how TCP/IP works in network environments

       and be able to set up TCP/IP in these environments.

     2.   Students will be able to configure and fix TCP/IP problems at

       the client and server levels.

     3.   Students will be able to configure DHCP to run in network

       environments.

     4.   Students will be able to manage, troubleshoot, and maximize

       the server via the server utilities.

     5.   Students will be able to manage, troubleshoot, and maximize

       mix server environments.

     6.   Students will be able to identify the tape drive

       specifications and procedures needed by the server and install the

       drive in the servers.

     7.   Students will be able to create a backup procedure and

       implement that procedure in the network environment.

     8.   Students will be able to integrate multiple platforms in a

       network environment.

     9.   Students will be able to use advanced administration

       techniques for system and user policies in the environment.

     10.  Students will be able to use group policies for advanced

       administration tasks in the environment.

     11.  Students will verify the Domain Name Service as it relates to

       the Internet and enable environments to communicate using DNS on

       the Internet.

     12.  Students will be able to configure the environments to

       communicate using DNS on the Internet.

     13.  Students will describe the security issues facing companies

       that connect to the Internet.

     14.  Students will be able to identify the role firewalls play in

       connecting a local area network to the Internet.

     15.  Students will be able to explain the purpose filtering

       Internet contents and setting up filtering at the server or client

       level.





Enabling Objectives:

All Sections: Students will understand and be able to adhere to

the safety procedures specified in every lab. This will always

include using an ESD strap and unplugging the PC from external

power whenever the cover is off the PC or the components are being

installed on the motherboard. Students will always take these

important steps in addition to other component specific steps

before proceeding to work on the PC.



All Sections: Students will search for products and company

information via the web as needed in the lab assignments. They

will find URLs needed for any given application/specification.

They will use search strings in the product knowledge base to

configure and troubleshoot products (software and hardware), and

use listserv groups to enhance their knowledge of any given

subject. The will be able to locate patches for products and

download and apply the patches. Students will use on-line and

paper manuals to set up and use products. Students will also

search the web via browsers to locate URLs that provide additional

information about products and specifications. Students,

reinforcing, and complimenting all assignments inside and outside

the classroom will regularly seek out the information on the web.

(IL - satisfies the information literacy component for all

courses)



PART I TCP/IP

1.   Students will define TCP/IP.

2.   Students will define class A, B, and C IP classes.

3.   Students will state the High Order Bit, First Octet Range,

  Number of networks, and number of hosts/network for each address

  class.

4.   Students will define the use of the subnet mask as it is

  applied to IP addressing.

5.   Students will match the default subnet mask to its respective

  class type.

6.   Students will define subnetting.

7.   Students will define the use of a routing table.

8.   Students will define ARP and how it works.

9.   Students will define WINS.

10.  Students will define the use of the default gateway.

11.  Students will install an IP address on a server.

12.  Students will install an IP address on higher-level server.

13.  Students will install TCP/IP on a client workstation and use

   winipconfig to troubleshoot the workstation.

14.  Students will use ping to troubleshoot IP addresses.



PART II DHCP

1.   Students will define DHCP and why it should be used.

2.   Students will define the process by which DHCP assigns IP

  addresses.

3.   Students will create a DHCP server.

4.   Students will create an nixed environment DHCP server.

5.   Students will define the subnet and the subnet address ranges

  for each server.

6.   Students will configure a client to use DHCP.



PART III Windows NT server administration

1.   Students will define the structure of the registry.

2.   Students will view the registry.

3.   Students will edit a registry value.

4.   Students will add a registry value.

5.   Students will search the registry.

6.   Students will define hives as they relate to registries.

7.   Students will explain how to edit a remote registry.

8.   Students will learn the registry keys.

9.   Students will define the purpose of the server manager.

10.  Students will view the computer menu.

11.  Students will view the view menu.

12.  Students will view the options menu.

13.  Students will start, stop, and pause services.

14.  Students will configure services.

15.  Students will define the system utility.

16.  Students will explore the environment of the system utility.

17.  Students will explore the general properties of the system

  utility.

18.  Students will explore hardware profiles.

19.  Students will explore user profiles.

20.  Students will monitor system performance.

21.  Students will explore startup/shutdown properties.

22.  Students will define the task manager and its use.

23.  Student will explore the performance tab.

24.  Students will explore the applications tab.

25.  Students will explore the processes tab.

26.  Students will use the system utility and task manager to

  monitor and optimize server performance.

27.  Students will explain the use of the server diagnostics.

28.  Students will list the version of the diagnostic program.

29.  Students will list system, diagnostic problems, and

  resolutions.

30.  Students will list display, drives, and memory problems and

  resolutions.

31.  Students will list services, problems, and resolutions

32.  Students will list resources, problems, and resolutions.

33.  Students will list the environment diagnostic messages and

  resolutions.

34.  Students will list the network diagnostic messages and

  resolutions.



PART IV Linux/Unix Server Administration

1.   The students will identify the server console.

2.   Students will explain the uses of the console.

3.   Students will issue console commands to display the

  environment and networks and servers.

4.   Students will explain the use of the set parameter.

5.   Students will list the parameters that can be set.

6.   Students will display the current set parameters of the

  server.

7.   Students will add server modules.

8.   Students will load monitor and list parameters the can be

  changed to optimize the server.

9.   Students will load and unload modules.

10.  Students will secure the console.

11.  Students will load the GUI and describe its uses.

12.  Students will view process and relate how to diagnose

  problems.



PART V Server Backup

1.   Students will visit the Arcserve Internet site and list

  specifications for the Arcserve backup for a server. (IL)

2.   Students will visit the Arcserver Internet site and list

  specifications for the Arcserver backup for a network environment.

  (IL)

3.   Students will list tape drives compatible with the servers we

  have set up in class.

4.   Students will list issues for backing up servers.

5.   Students will list issues for backup up the network

  environment.

6.   Students will visit the Backup Exec Internet site and list

  specifications for Backup Exec. (IL)

7.   Students will visit the Backup Exec Internet site and list

  specifications for the network environment. (IL)

8.   Students will install a tape backup into the servers.

9.   Students will install Backup Exec in the servers.

10.  Students will configure the Backup Exec software to backup

  the server data.

11.  Students will define full, incremental, and differential

backup.

12.  Students will define copy and daily backups per NT backups.

13.  Students will describe the rotating media and plot the

Grandfather, Father, Son method.

14.  Students will plot the two-step rotation.

15.  Students will describe the journalized archive.

16.  Students will describe the perpetual archive.

17.  Students will list the items addressed in a disaster recovery

plan.



PART VI Integrating Server Environments

1.   Students will define problems in a mixed environment.

2.   Students will define services as they relate to their network

3.   Students will prepare a server to support a mixed

  environment.

4.   Students will install the services.

5.   Students will activate the services and add shares.

6.   Students will configure users, printers, and passwords in the

  mixed environment.

7.   Students will prepare the servers for a mixed environment.

8.   Students will configure workstation for users, printers, and

  passwords via the mixed environment.

9.   Students will list advantages and limitations of the mixed

  environment.



PART VII Managing Clients

1.   Student will define the use of user policies.

2.   Students will list the user policies.

3.   Students will define the use of system policies.

4.   Students will list system policies.

5.   Students will configure user policies with windows.

6.   Students will configure system policies for windows.

7.   Students will install policies on the network.

8.   Students will configure user policies via the network

  servers.

9.   Students will configure system policies via the network

  servers.



PART VII Domain Name Services

1.   Students will define DNS.

2.   Students will explain the DNS name resolution process.

3.   Students will install DNS on a server.

4.   Students will install DNS in the mixed environment.

5.   Students will list the parts of the zone.

6.   Students will configure the server with zones.

7.   Students will configure the environment with zones.

8.   Students will use ping to troubleshoot DNS problems.

9.   Students will configure clients with DNS.



PART IX Security and the Internet

1.   Students will describe how a firewall is used.

2.   Students will describe a network level firewall.

3.   Students will describe an application level firewall.

4.   Students will explain how filtering works.

5.   Students will install a filter program onto a client.

6.   Students will configure the filter program.





Required Text: Microsoft Corporation, Microsoft Windows 2000

Server, Academic Learning Series, Microsoft Press, ISBN 0-7356-

0988-8





Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: 50 of the grade is

determined by test grades. Six tests will be given throughout the

semester. 50 of the grade is determined by lab experiments and

homework. All lab assignments, procedures, and handouts will be

complete for each test area will be completed before students take

the test and will be reviewed after each test. All homework must

be typed and handed in by the due date assigned. No late work or

labs will be accepted.



Attendance: Students are expected to attend all scheduled classes.

They are expected to make up all missed work. Students who miss a

class are required to make up any missed lab before the test for

the section. Missed homework cannot be made up as you have several

different ways to hand it in on time including face to face early

or email. Any missed test must be completed by the end of the next

class after the test. Failure to do so will result in a 0 for

items missed.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an act

of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in this course,

academic probation, and/or suspension from the college. See the

student handbook for additional details.



Student Safety and Procedures: Students are required to follow

procedures for their own safety and the safety of others. Specific

procedures are to be adhered to when working with the PC and

equipment. These procedures will be demonstrated by the

instructor, detailed in handouts and procedures, and are an

intricate part of every lab. Should students have any doubts or

questions regarding a procedure, they should ask the instructor

before proceeding.



Software and Hardware Policies: The school is licensed to use all

software required in class and lab. Students will not be allowed

to copy software from the school PCs. It is an illegal act to copy

this software. Students will run the risk of dismissal from the

class and possibly the school if software is copied illegally.

Viruses can be transmitted through various media. Students will

take every precaution when working with the schools software and

hardware, adhering to the procedures for protecting from viruses.

Students will not bring their own software to class nor will they

install it on any school PC.





Course Activities: Students will spend half the time in a

lecture/demonstration series by the instructor. The instructor

will use PowerPoint presentations, videos (taped and from the

Internet) and overhead projections from the instructors PC during

that time. The instructor will also use the PC to demonstrate

hands-on processes the students are expected to learn. The other

half of the time the students are expected to reinforce the things

learned in the lecture/demonstration in a supervised instructor

led lab. Student will use the PC to gather information needed to

do the hands on lab portion. This includes using the Internet to

visit the sites of on-line companies, use all available on-line

resources (knowledge bases, on-line videos, on-line technical

support, and on-line product manuals) to complete labs as

assigned. The PC is also the centered of the lab experience, as

students will apply what they have learned via installing and

configuring software and hardware on the personal computer.





Course Content outline:

I.   TCP/IP

     a.   Configuring TCP/IP on the server

     b. Configuring TCP/IP on the client

     c.   Troubleshooting TCP/IP at the server

     d. Troubleshooting TCP/IP at the client

     e.   Server requirements



II.  DHCP

     a.   How it works

     b.   Setting up in Windows

     c.   Setting up in Linux



III. Windows server administration

     a. Working with the registry

     b.   Server manager

     c. Systems utility

     d.   Task manager

     e. Server optimization

     f.   Diagnostics



IV.  Linux/Unix Server Administration

     a.   The server console

     b.   Console commands

     c.   Server set parameters

     d.   Server optimization

     e.   Managing modules

     f.   Diagnostics

     

V.   Server backup

     a.   Arcserve

     b.   Backup Exec

     c.   Tape drives

     d.   Backup procedures



VI.  Integrating network operating systems

     a.   Modules for integration

     b.   Problems with integration

     c.   Managing integrated environments

     

VII. Managing Clients

     a.   User Policies

     b.   System policies

     c.   Group policies



VIII.     Domain Name Services

     a.   Installation and management

     b.   Management in the network environment



IX.  Security and the Internet

     a.   Firewalls

     b. Filtering sites
