IT102

How the Mac Works

Credits:  2

Pre-Requisites:  Completion of EN 098, EN 099 and MA 091, if

required

Revised Credit Distribution Spring 2002



Donna Dobie

Department Co-Chair, Business, Computer  Technical Studies

dobiesalemcc.edu



Course Description:

This course is designed to teach the students the Macintosh

computer user interface, operating systems, troubleshooting

hardware problems and software problems, and networking with

TCP/IP,  LocalTalk and wireless (Airport).  They will learn

about the various components and accessories that make up

the Macintosh computer.  They will also learn about the

various tools needed to troubleshoot both hardware and

software problems.  In addition, students will load an

operating system.   They will learn to find updates and

patches for software and hardware via the Internet.





Course Performance Objectives:

1.    Students will learn the history of Apple Computers and

the software and hardware companies

       that continually make major contributions to the

Macintosh computer.

2.   Students will identify all of the components of the

  Macintosh computer.

3.   Students will be able to navigate the Macintosh

  computer and know basic keyboard commands.

4.   Students will be able to install and configure the

  Macintosh operating system.

5.   Students will be able to configure basic networking via

  LocalTalk, TCP/IP and Airport.

6.   Students will know basic troubleshooting techniques for

  hardware problems.

7.   Students will know basic troubleshooting techniques for

  software problems.



Enabling Objectives:

All Sections: Students will understand and be able to adhere

to the safety procedures specified in every lab. This will

always include using an ESD strap and unplugging the

Macintosh from external power whenever the cover is off the

Macintosh or any components are being installed. Students

will always take these important steps in addition to other

component specific steps before proceeding to work on the

Macintosh.



All Sections: Students will search for products and company

information via the web as needed in the lab assignments.

They will find URLs needed for any given

application/specification. They will use search strings in

the product knowledge base to configure and troubleshoot

products (software and hardware), and use listserv groups to

enhance their knowledge of any given subject. They will be

able to locate patches for products and download and apply

the patches. Students will use on-line and paper manuals to

set up and use products. Students will also search the web

via browsers to locate URLs that provide additional

information about products and specifications. Students,

reinforcing and complimenting all assignments inside and

outside the classroom, will regularly seek out the

information on the web. (IL)



  PART I Macintosh Computer Background

      Students will visit the web sites of the major

     contributors of software and hardware and explore available

     technical support, especially Apples knowledge base and

     technical specifications.

  PART II Components that make Up the Basic Macintosh

  computer

      Students will visually identify the following

     components that can be used to make a typical Macintosh

     computer: logic board, processor, memory, case, power

     supply, storage devices, keyboard, mouse, multimedia

     hardware and monitor.



  PART III Logic Board

      Students will identify parts of the logic board and

     features relating to each part.

  PART IV Memory

      Students will visually identify the different types of

     RAM (SIMM and DIMM).

  PART V Input Devices

         Students will install a keyboard and a mouse (ABD and

       USB).

  PART VI I/O Interfaces

  

      Students will describe the functions and usage for each

     of the following I/O

  

      Interfaces: ABD, serial, printer port, modem port, IDE,

     SCSI, USB and Firewire ports.



      Students will configure multiple devices on a SCSI

     chain.



  PART VII Communications



      Students will configure a modem for Internet access.



  PART VIII Operating Systems



      Students will learn how to determine which operating

     systems are compatible with which Macintosh models.



      Students will initialize the hard drive to accept the

     operating system.



      Students will load the Macintosh operating system.



      Students will apply any updates required via the web

     for the operating system.



      Students will use the Macintosh Apple System Profiler

     to examine the system setup.



      Students will learn basic troubleshooting tools, repair

     techniques and maintenance procedures.



  PART IX Networking



      Students will network a number of Macintosh computers

     with a hub and TCP/IP protocol.



      Students will network a number of Macintosh computers

     with PhoneNet connectors and LocalTalk.



      Student will network a number of Macintosh computer

     with an Airport Base Station.



Required Text:   Rizzo, John and Clark, K. Daniel, How the

Mac Works, Millennium Edition, Que, ISBN 0-7897-2428-6.



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:

60 of the grade is determined by twelve quizzes. 40 of the

grade will be determined by completion of homework

assignments.



Attendance: Students are expected to attend all scheduled

classes. They are expected to make up all missed work.

Students who miss a class are required to make up its

contents (labs, homework, and tests) within two weeks of the

absence. Failure to do so will result in a 0 for items

missed.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an

act of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in this

course, academic probation, and/or suspension from the

college. See the student handbook for additional details.



Student Safety and Procedures: Students are required to

follow procedures for their own safety and the safety of

others. Specific procedures are to be adhered to when

working with the computer and equipment. These procedures

will be demonstrated by the instructor, detailed in handouts

and procedures, and are an intricate part of every lab.

Should students have any doubts or questions regarding a

procedure, they should ask the instructor before proceeding.



Software and Hardware Policies: The school is licensed to

use all software required in class and lab. Students will

not be allowed to copy software from the school computers.

It is an illegal act to copy this software. Students will

run the risk of dismissal from the class, and possibly the

school, if software is copied illegally. Viruses can be

transmitted through various media. Students will take every

precaution when working with the schools software and

hardware, adhering to the procedures for protecting from

viruses. Students will not bring their own software to

class, nor will they install it on any school computer.





Material or Supplies: Students will be supplied with all

tools, software, hardware, and safety equipment required for

each lab. Items necessary to complete each lab will be given

out at the beginning of each lab and returned at the end of

each lab.



Course Activities: Students will spend two hours in a

lecture/demonstration series by the instructor. The

instructor will use PowerPoint presentations, videos or

overhead projections from the instructors computer during

that time. During the other hour, the students are expected

to reinforce the things learned in the lecture/demonstration

in a supervised instructor led lab. Student will use the

Macintosh to do hands-on lab portions. This includes using

the Internet to visit the sites of on-line companies and

using all available on-line resources (knowledge bases, on-

line technical support, and on-line product manuals). The

Macintosh is also the center of the lab experience, as

students will apply what they have learned.



Course Content Outline:

I  Macintosh Background

     A.   History of Apple Computers and the Macintosh

B.   Hardware and software companies for the Macintosh



II.  Hardware Components That Make up the Basic Macintosh

Computer

     A.   Case (Chassis)

B.   Power Supply

C.   Hard Disk Drive

D.   Floppy Disk Drive

E.   CD-ROM Drive

F.   Zip Drive

G.   Logic Board (Motherboard)

H.   Processor

I.   Memory (RAM), Virtual Memory, Cache Memory, RAM disk

J.   Video Card

K.   Sound Card

L.   Network Card, Airport card, Built-in Ethernet

M.   Modem Card

N.   Monitor

O.   Keyboard

P.   Mouse

     

III.  I/O Interfaces

     A.  ABD Ports

     B.   Serial Ports

     C.   IDE Interface

     D.   SCSI Interface

     E.   USB Ports

     F.   Firewire Ports



IV.  Software

     A.  Macintosh Operating Systems 6 through X

          1.   Loading the operating system

2.   Basic commands

3.   System folder

4.   Extensions

5.   Control Panels

6.   Preferences

     C.   Network System software

1.   LocalTalk

2.   TCP/IP

3.   Wireless



V.    Troubleshooting Problems and Maintenance Procedures

     A.   Hardware

     B.   Software



VI.  Basic Printer Technology
