            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College

Course Syllabus



PC Assembly Course Code:  IT 106

Credits:  2

Pre-Requisites:  Completion of EN 098, EN 099 and MA 091, if

required.

Co-Requisite:  MA 093, if required IT102, if required or

written permission of the Instructor.

Modified - Fall 02



Donna Dobie

Department Co-Chair

Business, Computer  Technical Studies

dobiesalemcc.edu



Course Description:  This course is designed to teach the

students how to assembly the personal computer and load the

operating system software.  As the students assembly their

computers, they will learn about the various components and

accessories that make up the personal computer.  They will

also learn about the various tools needed as they build

their personal computers.  In addition, student will load

the operating system and software that make up the desktop

of the personal computer.  In doing so, they will be

introduced to finding updates and patches for software via

the Internet and loading these updates and patches on the

PC.



Course Content Outline:

I  Personal Computer Background

     A.   History of the Personal Computer

B.   Major hardware and software companies



II.  Components That Make up the Basic PC

     A.   Case (Chassis)

B.   Power Supply

C.   Hard Disk Drive

D.   Floppy Disk Drive

E.   CD-ROM Drive

F.   Jazz and Zip Drives

G.   Motherboard

H.   Processor

I.   Memory (RAM)

J.   Video Card

K.   Sound Card

L.   Network Card

M.   Modem Card

N.   Monitor

O.   Keyboard

P.   Mouse

III.  Motherboards

     A.   Types

B.   Chipsets

C.   BIOS

D.   System bus

E.   Processor bus

F.   Memory bus

G.   I/O Buses

          1.   ISA

2.   EISA

3.   Local Bus

4.   VESA Local Bus

5.   PCI

6.   ASP Port

7.   System Resources and Conflicts



IV.   Memory

     A.   ROM

B.   RAM

          1.   Memory speeds

2.   DRAM

3.   SIMMs

4.   DIMMs

5.   RIMMs



V.  Power Supply



VI. Input Devices

     A.  Keyboards

     B.  Mice

     C.  Game Adapters



VII.  Video Hardware

     A.  Monitors

     B.  Video Display Adapters



VII.  Audio Hardware

     A.  Audio Adapter Applications

     B.  Audio Adapter Features



IX.  I/O Interfaces

     A. Parallel Ports

     B.  Serial Ports

     C.   IDE Interface

D.   EIDE Interface

     E.  SCSI Interface

     F.  USB Ports

     G.  Firewire Ports



X.  Communications

     A.  Modems

     B.   Network Interface Cards



XI.  Operating Systems

     A.  Windows operating systems

          1.   Loading the operating system

2.   Basic commands

3.   Basic system configuration

4.   Device Manager page and properties



Course Performance Objectives:

1.    Students will learn when and where the personal

information revolution began and the

       software and hardware companies that continually make

major contributions to the industry.



2.   Students will identify and safely install all the

  components that make up the basic personal

        computer.



3.   Students will name the parts of the motherboard,

  describe characteristics that can make the parts more

  efficient, and configure components via the CMOS setup as

  well as configuration software provided with the components.



4.   Students will identify and contrast ROM and RAM memory,

  state what enhancements can be included into the RAM memory,

  and choose the right RAM type based on motherboard slots to

  install in a system.



5.   Students, upon recognizing the need for a power supply,

  will hook up components needing

       the power supply.



6.    Students will be able to install and configure input

devices.



7.   Students will be able to select, install and configure

  video components.



8.   Students will be able to select, install and configure

  audio components.



9.   Students will be able to utilize system i/o interfaces

  as well as install and configure additional devices as the

  system grows.



10.  Students will be able to configure communication

  devices for Internet environments.



11.  Students will be able to install and configure the

  Windows operating systems, and virus protection software.



Enabling Objectives:

All Sections: Students will understand and be able to adhere

to the safety procedures specified in every lab. This will

always include using an ESD strap and unplugging the PC from

external power whenever the cover is off the PC or the

components are being installed on the motherboard. Students

will always take these important steps in addition to other

component specific steps before proceeding to work on the

PC.



All Sections: Students will search for products and company

information via the web as needed in the lab assignments.

They will find URLs needed for any given

application/specification. They will use search strings in

the product knowledge base to configure and troubleshoot

products (software and hardware), and use listserv groups to

enhance their knowledge of any given subject. They will be

able to locate patches for products and download and apply

the patches. Students will use on-line and paper manuals to

set up and use products. Students will also search the web

via browsers to locate URLs that provide additional

information about products and specifications. Students,

reinforcing and complimenting all assignments inside and

outside the classroom, will regularly seek out the

information on the web. (IL)

PART I Personal Computer Background

1.   Students will identify the process/materials that make

  personal computers possible.

2.   Students will visit the web sites of the major

  contributors of software and hardware and explore the site

  as well as read the online company history. (IL)

PART II Components that make Up the Basic PC

1.   Students will visually identify the following

  components that can be used to make a typical personal

  computer: motherboard, processor, memory, case, power

  supply, storage devices, keyboard, mouse, multimedia

  hardware and monitor.

2.   Students will state the safety procedures specific to

  each component and use those procedures to safely work with

  and install those components into a personal computer.

PART III Motherboard

1.   Students will state what features to look for in a

  motherboard, based on

      specifications given.

2.   Students will identify parts of the motherboard and

  features relating to each part.

3.   Students will identify which devices use particular

  system resources and how to

      resolve conflicts.

4.   Based on the motherboard available, students will

  install the motherboard into a

      case.

PART IV Memory

1.   Students will visually identify the different types of

  RAM (SIMM and DIMM) and features (DRAM, SDRAM, and EDO)

  specific to each type.

2.   Students will identify memory speed feature unique to

  each type.

3.   Students will describe which components run off the

  power supply and how and where to interface each component.

4.   Students will calculate the maximum amount of memory

  that can be installed based on slot size. (number of slots x

  maximum memory size per module  total memory that can be

  installed)

5.   Students will install memory modules.

6.   Students will calculate the memory installed. (number

  of memory modules x memory size per module  memory

  installed)

PART V Power Supply

1.   Students will identify which components are connected

  to which power supply lead.

2.   Students will safely install each component as the

  component is introduced to the system being built.

PART VI Input Devices

1.   Students will install a keyboard and a mouse (PS/2 and

serial).

PART VII Video Hardware

1.  Students will identify the features desired in a video

display adapter.

2.   Students will identify the features to look for in a

monitor.

3.   Students will install and configure a video display

adapter and monitor.



PART VIII Audio Hardware



1.  Students will install and configure an audio adapter and

speakers.

  

PART IX I/O Interfaces



1.   Students will describe the functions and usage for each

  of the following I/O

      interfaces: parallel, serial, IDE, EIDE, SCSI, USB.

2.   Students will install and configure the interfaces

(serial and parallel) for a modem.

3.   Students will identify/contrast IDE, EIDE, and SCSI

interfaces.

6.   Students will install and configure an EIDE hard drive

  and CD-ROM drive.



PART X Communications



1. Students will install and configure a modem for Internet

access.

          

PART XI Operating Systems



1.   Students will determine if the as-built PC can

  accommodate Windows95/98/2000.

2.   Students will troubleshoot the complete personal

  computer and format the hard drive to FAT32 specifications

  to accept an operating system.

3.   Students will load the Windows operating systems and

  configure it to work with all the installed components.

4.   Students will apply all patches required via the web

  for the operating system.

5.   Students will use the Windows system tools to

troubleshoot and examine the system setup.



Course Activities: Students will spend one hour in a

lecture/demonstration series by the instructor. The

instructor will use PowerPoint presentations, videos or

overhead projections from the instructors computer during

that time. During the other hour, the students are expected

to reinforce the things learned in the lecture/demonstration

in a supervised instructor led lab. Student will use the

PC to do hands-on lab portions. This includes using the

Internet to visit the sites of on-line companies and using

all available on-line resources (knowledge bases, on-line

technical support, and on-line product manuals). The PC is

also the center of the lab experience, as students will

apply what they have learned.



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:  Fifty percent

of the grade is determined by test grades. Six tests will be

given throughout the semester. Fifty percent of the grade is

determined by lab experiments and homework.



Grading:  Letter       Numerical Value       Grade Points

Grade

         A                  93-100                4.0

         A-                 90-92                 3.7

         B                 88-89                 3.3

         B                  83-87                 3.0

         B-                 80-82                 2.7

         C                 78-79                 2.3

         C                  73-77                 2.0

         C-                 70-72                 1.7

         D                 68-69                 1.3

         D                  63-67                 1.0

         F                 Below 60                0

         FA                Below 60                0

P - Pass:  This grade is given to students who

satisfactorily meet the course requirements in the following

types of courses: credit by exam, educational development

courses with code numbers below 100, health practicum

courses and co-op courses.  P grades are not calculated

into a students GPA.



I - Incomplete Work: This is a conditional grade given at

the discretion of the faculty member when student

emergencies prevent the completion of all course

requirements. The student must complete all requirements

within 30 days after the start of classes in the following

semester or term. If this condition is not met, the I

automatically becomes an F grade.



W-Withdrawal:  This grade signifies official withdrawal from

a course. See details under College Withdrawal.

R-Audit: This is not a grade but indicates a student took

the course for no credit and, therefore, no grade.



Attendance: Students are expected to attend all scheduled

classes. Any student who is absent for Thirty percent of the

classes (9 classes) will receive an FA for the course, no

exceptions.



Tests: No makeup tests allowed. Students must complete a

test on the test date or arrange to take a test in advance.

All tests are closed book. Anyone cheating will receive a 0

for that test and be subject to failing the class via

submittal to a disciplinary board of review.



Lab Assignments: Each lab will have the results written in

paragraph format and submitted via email on or before the

due date. All homework/assignments due before class starts

on the due date. Homework and assignments cannot be made up.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an

act of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in this

course, academic probation, and/or suspension from the

college. See the student handbook for additional details.



Student Safety and Procedures: Students are required to

follow procedures for their own safety and the safety of

others. Specific procedures are to be adhered to when

working with the equipment. These procedures will be

demonstrated by the instructor, detailed in handouts and

procedures, and are an intricate part of every lab. Should

students have any doubts or questions regarding a procedure,

they should ask the instructor before proceeding.



Software and Hardware Policies: The school is licensed to

use all software required in class and lab. Students will

not be allowed to copy software from the colleges  PCs. It

is an illegal act to copy this software. Viruses can be

transmitted through various media. Students will take every

precaution when working with the schools software and

hardware, adhering to the procedures for protecting from

viruses. Students will not bring their own software to

class, nor will they install it on any college PC. Students

are not permitted to play games or download/participate in

instant messaging or chat room in the labs. Students are

permitted to sign out the MSDNAA software related to the IT

class they are enrolled in. See the instructor to find out

what software is available for that class. MSDNAA software

can only be signed out during the first four weeks of

classes no software will be signed out after that. Students

will run the risk of dismissal from the class and the

college if found in violation of the software and hardware

policies.



Material or Supplies: Students will be required to purchase

a set of PC headphones and a computer repair toolkit with

grounding wrist strap. Students will be supplied with

additional tools, software, hardware, and safety equipment

required for each lab. Items necessary to complete each lab

will be given out at the beginning of each lab and returned

at the end of each lab.



Required Text: Glister, PC Hardwre: beginner Guide, 2001,

McGraw-Hill,  ISBN 0-07-212990-5
