            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College

Course Syllabus





Information Technology 107

Fundamentals of Electronic Communication

Credits:  4.0  Lecture: 2 / Laboratory 4

Pre-Requisites:  Completion of EN 98, EN 99, and MA 93, if

required.

Co-Requisite:  MAT 136, if required.

New Course:  Fall 2003



Donna Dobie

Department Co-Chair

Business, Computer  Technical Studies

dobiesalemcc.edu





Course Description Students will be introduced to the properties

and theories of electronic signals used in todays communications

devices. They will review the basic formation of circuits and Ohms

Law. Electrical signals used in telecommunications will be

introduced. The power of these signals, power ratios, and signal-

to-power frequency applications of these signals will be explored.

Students will explore waveform frequencies. The spectra of these

waveforms and filters applied to the spectra will be introduced.

Harmonics, linear, and non-linear circuits in signaling and their

impacts will be discussed. Distortions effects on signals will be

demonstrated. All these principles are applied to telephone and

communications systems and voltage and power amplifiers used in

those systems. This course reinforces the theory with practical

hands-on exercises.





Place in College Curriculum:  spring or fall semester in the first

year of the Telecommunications Cabling Technician Certification

and fall semester in the first year of Communications Technology

AAS degree.



Course Content Outline:

  I.    Basic Electronics

       A.    Ohms Law

B.    AC circuits

C.    DC Circuits

D.    Multimeter

E.    Oscilloscope

  II.   Electrical Signals

       A.    Audio Signals

B.    Telecommunication Signals

C.    Dimensions

D.    Phase

E.    Noise in Signals

  III.  Signal Power

       A.    Sine Wave

B.    Power in Networks and Circuits

C.    Network Calculations

D.    Power Gains and Losses

  IV.   Logarithmic Power Ratios

       A.    Calculating Decibels

B.    DB Conversions

C.    Referenced Absolute Power

D.    Power Scaling with Prefixes

  V.    Power/Frequency Applications

       A.    Acoustical Signal Power

B.    Frequency Response of Circuits

C.    Signal-to-Noise Ratios

D.    Signal Power Transfer

  VI.   Frequencies within Signal Waveforms

       A.    Sine and Non-sine Waveforms

B.    Waveforms and Multiple Frequencies

  VII.  Frequency and Power Distribution

       A.    Spectra of Complex Waveforms

B.    Bandwidth and Bandpass

C.    Harmonic Distortion

  VIII.      Filters

       A.    Filter Characteristics

B.    Filter Type

C.    Equalizing Networks

  IX.   Utilizing Waveforms and Harmonics

       A.    Harmonic Suppression

B.    Harmonic Generation

C.    Harmonic Multipliers

  X.    Multiple Signals in Linear circuits

       A.    Superposition

B.    Linear Circuits

  XI.   Multiple Signals in Non-Linear Circuits

       A.    Intermodulation Distortion

B.    Frequency and Power Distribution of Intermod Signals

  XII.  Application of Intermodulation Distortion

       A.    Suppressing Harmonic and Intermod Signals

B.    Modulation

C.    Mixers

  XIII.      Transducers and Audio and Telephone Systems

       A.    Transducers

B.    Electric Properties of Input Transducers

C.    Electric Properties of Output Transducers

  XIV.  Audio voltage and Power Amplifiers

       A.    Transistor Amplifiers

B.    Combining Amplifier Circuits

C.    Integrated Circuit Audio Amplifiers

D.    Passive components

                 

Course Performance and Enabling Objectives



Enabling Objectives for all Sections:  Students will understand

and be able to adhere to the safety procedures specified in every

lab. Students will search for products and company information via

the web as needed in the lab assignments. They will find URLs

needed for any given application/specification. They will use

search strings in the product knowledge base to configure and

troubleshoot products (software and hardware), and use listserv

groups to enhance their knowledge of any given subject. They will

be able to locate patches for products, download, and apply the

patches. Students will use on-line and paper manuals to set up and

use products. Students will also search the web via browsers to

locate URLs that provide additional information about products and

specifications. Students, reinforcing and complementing all

assignments inside and outside the classroom, will regularly seek

out the information on the web. (IL)

  

I. Basic Electronics

 

   Performance Objectives:

    1.    Use Ohms law to calculate various electrical outputs.

    2.    Students will measure outputs with oscilloscopes and

      multimeters.

      

    Enabling Objectives:

    1.    List the variations of Ohms law to calculate voltage,

      resistance, and current.

2.    Use Ohms Law to calculate voltage, resistance, and current

given any basic circuit.

3.    Use an oscilloscope to measure characteristics of electrical

signals.

4.    Use a multimeter to measure AC and DC voltage, resistance,

and current.

    

II. Electrical Signals

         

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Define the properties of signals in both acoustics and

      electrical form.

    2.    Describe and dimension signal frequency, wavelength, and

      phase.

3.    Apply the terms and formulas of basic AC to electrical

signals.

4.    Calculate the relationship of time and frequency, phase and

distance, and phase and time.

    

    Enabling Objectives:

    1.    Discuss telecommunications as a career field, and identify

      technical aspects of the related subdisciplines.

2.    Identify acoustic and electrical signals.

3.    Show examples of how both signals are used in telephone

practice.

4.    Identify telecommunication signals and define the concept of

frequency, audio spectrum, and electromagnetic spectrum.

5.    List the units by which signal frequency and wavelength are

dimensioned.

6.    Describe the relationship of wavelength, frequency, time,

and phase.

7.    Describe the relationship between time, frequency, and

resonance and demonstrate those relationships in electrical LC

networks.

8.    Explain noise and signal-to-noise ratio.

    

III. Signal Power

     

     Performance Objectives:

    1.    Apply the terms and formulas of basic AC to electrical

      signals.

2.    Use basic terminology to scribe and dimension signal power.

    

    Enabling Objectives:

     1.    Identify the four factors of electrical energy (EMF,

      resistance, current, and power),  emphasizing power as the factor

      that defines electrical work.

    2.    Apply the terms and formulas of basic AC to electrical

      signals.

3.    Use basic terminology to describe and dimension signal

power.

4.    List the common units in which power is defined, and the

Ohms law relationships from which power is computed, including

rms and p-p formulas.

5.    List examples of signal power applied to common electrical

devices.

      

IV. Logarithmic Power ratios

    

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Calculate power gains and losses in dB units, and convert

      these levels to voltage, current, and power ratios.

2.    Calculate referenced power levels in dBm, and convert these

levels to voltage, current, and power ratings.

    

    Enabling Objectives:

    1.    Identify common signal waveforms, and show how combining

      multiple frequency sine waves creates them.

2.    Specify the logarithmic relationships of power in physical

phenomena, including acoustic and electrical signals.

3.    Calculate and convert decibels to power ratios, and vice

versa.

4.    Calculate and convert decibels to power ratios using actual

telecommunications scenarios

5.    Describe dBm as a measure of how signal power is scaled in

reference to a 1 mW  standard. Describe similar standards with

dBf, dBrnC.

6.    Make distinctions between gain and loss measured in dB,

signal power in dBm, and acoustic power in dB.

7.    Apply power scaling to a sequence of test points along a

communication circuit that has both gains and losses, with

referenced signal power measured at the circuits input and output

terminals.

8.    Demonstrate power measurements in mW made at different

points along a circuit.

9.    Convert power measurements to dBm and calculate signal gain

and loss between points in the circuit where signal power is

measured.

    

V. Power/Frequency Applications

    

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Define the concepts of frequency response, power versus

      frequency, to telephone and audio equipment.

2.    State the signal-to-noise ratios required for reliable

communication with telephone and audio equipment.

3.    Describe and dimension the characteristics of transmission

lines and cables used for the efficient transfer of signal power.

    

    Enabling Objectives:

    1.    Relate the sound pressure levels of acoustical signals that

      are measured in dB to the  loudness of common sounds in the

      environment.

2.    Describe the general frequency response of human hearing

using the Fletcher-Munsen curves as a reference.

3.    Apply the measurement process by which frequency responses

are made and apply the process to an LCR network.

4.    Identify the terminology of frequency and phase responses as

applied to filters.

5.    Define the character of frequency response slopes specified

in the dB-per-range of frequencies.

6.    Define noise as a random-frequency signal distributed across

a range of frequencies.

7.    Describe signal-to-noise ratio as the dB relationship

between two power levels.

8.    Apply the concept of S/n to the clarity of communication

signals.

9.    Describe power losses that occur along transmission lines

and circuits to mismatched impedances.

10.   Calculate mismatch loss in dB.

    

VI. Frequencies within Signal Waveforms

    

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Define the fundamental and harmonic frequencies of

      electrical signals.

2.    Identify common signal waveforms, and explain how combining

multiple frequency sine waves can create them.

    

    Enabling Objectives:

    1.    Describe the sine wave in reference to degrees of rotation,

      relating the amplitude of the voltage to phase angles from 0

      degrees to 90 degrees.

2.    Define the resulting character of waveforms in relations to

combining signals of frequencies and those frequencies within the

waveform.

3.    Reverse the superposition process and describe how different

waveforms contain multiple frequencies.

4.    Define the character of waveforms and explain how waveforms

define each of the frequencies contained within them.

5.    List the terminology related to fundamental and harmonic

frequencies.

6.    Define by example the fundamental and harmonic frequencies

contained within a non- sine waveform.

7.    Describe frequency domain and how spectrum analyzers are

used to measure and display the frequencies and power levels of

signals containing harmonics.

8.    Make comparisons and distinctions between the frequency-

domain spectrum analyzer and the time-domain oscilloscope.

9.    Describe common communication signals and their waveforms

that include harmonics.

10.   Relate a circuits frequency response to the number of

harmonics within a signal that   will pass through a circuit.

    

VII. Frequency and Power Distribution

    

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Define the harmonic structures of common signal waveforms,

      and identify their frequency and power distribution

2.    Specify the common forms of waveform distortion applied to

signals that pass through electronic circuits.

3.    Specify the effects of circuit bandpass and frequency

response on signal waveforms and their harmonic structure.

    

         Enabling Objectives:

    1.    Demonstrate the spectra of common complex signal waveforms

      using both spectrum analyzer and oscilloscope display.

2.    Apply the concepts of spectral distribution to the

calculation of circuit bandpass required to retain all of the

harmonics within a waveform.

3.    Use calculations to show how limiting circuit bandpass

through filtering limit the spectral distribution and reduce the

harmonics of complex signal waveforms simplifying signals.

4.    Define the types and characteristics of popular filters.

5.    Calculate the relationships between slope, bandpass, and Q.

6.    Apply the concept of filtering to the equalizing networks

used in telephone practice.

7.    Define the concept of harmonic distortion wherein harmonic

frequencies are created through the distortion of a sine wave

signal.

8.    Compare the power level of the fundamental with the power

levels of harmonic signals.

9.    Describe the applications of harmonic distortion used in

communication practice.

    

VIII. Filters

    

         Performance Objectives:

    1.    Determine the effects of selective filtering on the

      suppression and/or selection of specific harmonic signals.

2.    Relate the concepts of harmonic distortion and frequency

generation to telephone, audio, and telecommunication systems.

    

    Enabling Objectives:

    1.    List the signal requirements of communication circuits.

2.    Describe how harmonics are suppressed by limiting circuit

bandpass with filters.

3.    List and describe the four general categories of filters,

loss-pass, high-pass, bandpass,  and bandstop.

4.    Describe how equalization networks are used in

communications circuits.

    

IX. Utilizing Waveforms and Harmonics

    

        Performance Objectives:

    1.    Relate the results of waveform distortion to the generation

      of harmonic frequency signals.

2.    Apply the concepts of harmonic generation and frequency

response to the analysis of electronic comb and marker signal

sources.

3.    Relate the concept of harmonic distortion and frequency

generation to telephone, audio, and telecommunication systems.

    

        Enabling Objectives:

    1.    List the contrary requirements of communications circuits

      and systems to create and/or maintain harmonics within their

      bandpass.

2.    Describe harmonic generators (harmonic multipliers) and

their use in creating frequencies, which are multiples of a stable

fundamental frequency.

3.    Detail the specification of the harmonic signal levels

available from specific waveforms.

4.    Detail the operation of the basic FDM (frequency division

multiplex) system that uses harmonic generation to assure the

synchronous operation of the multiple voice channels it processes.

5.    Calculate the efficiency and frequency range in harmonic

generators and multipliers, including doublers and triplers.

    

X. Multiple Signals in Linear Circuits

    

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Identify and distinguish between linear and non-linear

      circuits that process two or more signals.

    

         Enabling Objectives:

    1.    Calculate the effects of linear mixing of two signals using

      superposition techniques.

2.    Identify the waveforms that result from the adding, or

linear mixing, of signals.

3.    Describe the results of superposition as it applies to the

combination of two signals within a linear circuit.

4.    Calculate the voltage and frequency of signals within

linearly combined waveforms.

    

XI. Multiple Signals in Non-Linear Circuits

    

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Determine and identify the waveforms that will result from

      the processing of two signals through non-linear circuits.

2.    Determine and identify the intermodulation frequencies that

result from processing two signals through non-linear circuits.

3.    Calculate the percentage factors of intermodulation and

harmonic distortion in circuits and signals.

4.    Calculate the power distribution of intermodulation signals

over their range of frequencies.

    

        Enabling Objectives:

    1.    Relate the results of waveform distortion to the generation

      of harmonic frequency signals.

2.    Apply the concepts of harmonic generation and frequency

response to the analysis of electronic comb and marker signal

sources.

3.    Describe the results of combining two signals in a non-

linear device.

4.    Identify modulation and intermodulation distortion as a

result of one signal affecting the waveform of another.

5.    Identify the sum and difference frequencies present within

the waveform of a modulated signal.

6.    Calculate the intermodulation and harmonic frequencies

produces when two signals are applied to a non-linear circuit.

7.    Specify the bandwidth of signals and the circuit bandpass

required to retain frequencies.

8.    Define intermodulation distortion, and explain how it is

measured and show how to calculate IMD.

    

XII. Application of Intermodulation Distortion

    

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Specify the effects of circuit bandpass and frequency

      response upon the signal waveforms and intermodulation

      frequencies.

2.    Determine the effects of phase and filtering upon the

generation, suppression, and/or selection of harmonic and intermod

signals.

3.    Apply the concepts of intermod products to the modulation of

signals and the frequency conversion of signals in communications

systems.

    

        Enabling Objectives:

    1.    List the requirements for suppressing harmonics and intermod

      signals in communication circuits and systems by limiting circuit

      bandpass, applying phase cancellation, and filtering.

2.    Describe the concept of modulation process, which purposely

uses intermodulation distortion.

3.    Define the terminology of the modulation process including

carrier and sideband frequencies, modulation index, and the

modulation forms DSB-AM, DSB-SC, and SSB.

4.    Describe the uses of filters in selecting and/or suppressing

specific intermod signals.

5.    Describe the process of phase cancellation using the

balanced modulation circuit to suppress specific modulation of

intermod signals.

6.    Calculate sideband frequencies and power levels in AM, DSB-

SC, and SSB circuits.

7.    Define the distinctions between the power and voltage levels

of sideband signals and the total sideband power as the sum of

(twice) each sideband signal power level.

8.    Define the mixer as a form of AM modulator and explain how

it is distinct in function from the modulator.

9.    Specify the use of the mixer in frequency conversion

processes critical to communication systems.

10.   Clarify the distinctions between unbalanced, single-

balanced, and double-balanced mixers.

    

XIII. Transducers and Audio and Telephone Systems

    

    Performance Objectives:

    1.    Identify the electrical principles, acoustical and

      electrical properties upon which popular input (microphones and

      telephone transmitters) and output (loudspeakers and telephone

      receivers) transducers operate.

2.    Determine the efficiency of transducers from measured

specifications, and convert Db SPL to electrical signal power.

3.    Determine the electrical requirements of gain and power

level for amplifier systems using input and output transducers.

    

        Enabling Objectives:

    1.    Define transducers as the elements in the telephone handset

      that converts acoustic signals to electrical signals and vice

      versa.

2.    Identify the types of transducers used in microphones and

speakers, and in telephone transmitters and receivers.

3.    Define the important electrical properties of microphones

(telephone transmitters), including sensitivity, frequency

response, impedance, noise, and distortion.

4.    Define the important electrical properties of loudspeakers

(telephone receivers), including sensitivity (efficiency),

frequency response, impedance, power, and distortion.

5.    Calculate the sensitivity of microphones, and convert their

specifications to voltage levels.

6.    Demonstrate the application of microphone data to determine

impedance and power transfer relationships.

7.    Calculate the efficiency of speakers and determine required

signal power levels versus acoustic power.

    

XIV. Audio voltage and Power Amplifiers

    

         Performance Objectives:

    1.    Identify the distinctions used to classify voltage

      amplifiers versus power amplifiers in electronic circuitry.

2.    Identify and categorize the dominant electrons devices used

to amplify signals, including bipolars, FETs, and ICs.

3.    Identify and categorize the dominant circuit configurations

in which bipolar, FET and IC devices are placed for signal

amplification.

4.    Determine the operating characteristics of amplifier devices

and circuits, including gain, impedance, and power levels.

5.    Determine the effects of amplifier circuits upon the

frequency response, noise, and distortion of signals passing

through them.

    

         Enabling Objectives:

    1.    List the properties of electronic amplifiers that are

      critical to circuit performance.

2.    Define the configurations of single-staged transistor

amplifier circuit connections

3.    Define the power requirements of single-stage transistor

amplifier circuit connections.

4.    List the voltage and power gain performance of various

single-stage transistor amplifier circuit connections.

5.    Describe the multi-stage transistor connections typical of

those found within IC devices

6.    Describe the discrete complementary-symmetry output driver

7.    Describe the differential input voltage amplifier.

8.    Describe the structure of the IC operational amplifier

9.    Describe the differential input and complementary output

stages of the IC operational amplifier

10.   Apply the circuit to the amplification of voice signals used

in telephone practice.



Course Activities: Students will spend 1/3 the time in a

lecture/demonstration series presented by the instructor. The

instructor will use the RealCBT learning system among other

resources for video lectures and simulations. The instructor will

also use circuit boards and electronic trainers to demonstrate

hands-on processes the students are expected to learn. The other

2/3 of the time the students are expected to reinforce the things

learned in the lecture/demonstration in a supervised instructor

led lab. Students will use the tools and testing equipment

typically found in the industry to do the hands-on lab portion.

This includes using the Internet to visit the sites of on-line

companies and using all available on-line resources (knowledge

bases, on-line videos, on-line technical support, and on-line

product manuals) to complete labs as assigned.



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:  Fifty percent of the

grade is determined by test grades. Six tests will be given

throughout the semester. Fifty percent of the grade is determined

by lab experiments and homework.



Grading:  Letter Grade    Numerical Value         Grade Points

          A                    93-100                  4.0

          A-                   90-92                   3.7

          B                   88-89                   3.3

          B                    83-87                   3.0

          B-                   80-82                   2.7

          C                   78-79                   2.3

          C                    73-77                   2.0

          C-                   70-72                   1.7

          D                   68-69                   1.3

          D                    63-67                   1.0

          F                   Below 60                  0

          FA                  Below 60                  0

P - Pass:  This grade is given to students who satisfactorily meet

the course requirements in the following types of courses: credit

by exam, educational development courses with code numbers below

100, health practicum courses and co-op courses.  P grades are

not calculated into a students GPA.



I - Incomplete Work: This is a conditional grade given at the

discretion of the faculty member when student emergencies prevent

the completion of all course requirements. The student must

complete all requirements within 30 days after the start of

classes in the following semester or term. If this condition is

not met, the I automatically becomes an F grade.



W-Withdrawal:  This grade signifies official withdrawal from a

course. See details under College Withdrawal.

R-Audit: This is not a grade but indicates a student took the

course for no credit and, therefore, no grade.

Attendance: Students are expected to attend all scheduled classes.

Any student who is absent for Thirty percent of the classes (9

classes) will receive an FA for the course, no exceptions.



Tests: No makeup tests allowed. Students must complete a test on

the test date or arrange to take a test in advance. All tests are

closed book. Anyone cheating will receive a 0 for that test and be

subject to failing the class via submittal to a disciplinary board

of review.



Lab Assignments: Each lab will have the results written in

paragraph format and submitted via email on or before the due

date. All homework/assignments due before class starts on the due

date. Homework and assignments cannot be made up.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an act

of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in this course,

academic probation, and/or suspension from the college. See the

student handbook for additional details.



Student Safety and Procedures: Students are required to follow

procedures for their own safety and the safety of others. Specific

procedures are to be adhered to when working with the equipment.

These procedures will be demonstrated by the instructor, detailed

in handouts and procedures, and are an intricate part of every

lab. Should students have any doubts or questions regarding a

procedure, they should ask the instructor before proceeding.



Software and Hardware Policies: The school is licensed to use all

software required in class and lab. Students will not be allowed

to copy software from the colleges  PCs. It is an illegal act to

copy this software. Viruses can be transmitted through various

media. Students will take every precaution when working with the

schools software and hardware, adhering to the procedures for

protecting from viruses. Students will not bring their own

software to class, nor will they install it on any college PC.

Students are not permitted to play games or download/participate

in instant messaging or chat room in the labs. Students are

permitted to sign out the MSDNAA software related to the IT class

they are enrolled in. See the instructor to find out what software

is available for that class. MSDNAA software can only be signed

out during the first four weeks of classes no software will be

signed out after that. Students will run the risk of dismissal

from the class and the college if found in violation of the

software and hardware policies.



Required Text: The Principles of Electronic Communication, 2001,

Heathkit, ISBN 0-87119-296-7



Material or Supplies: Students will be required to purchase a set

of PC headphones and a computer repair toolkit with grounding

wrist strap. Students will be supplied with additional tools,

software, hardware, and safety equipment required for each lab.

Items necessary to complete each lab will be given out at the

beginning of each lab and returned at the end of each lab.
