6



IT 204

Computer Repair II

Credits: 4

Pre-Requisites: Pre-Requisites: IT 106, IT102, IT104 or written

permission of Instructor

New Course Fall 2002



Donna Dobie

Department Co-Chair: Business, Computer, and Technical Studies

dobiesalemcc.edu



Course Description: Students will continue to build on what they

learn in IT 104 Computer Repair I. This course continues to

parallel the CompTia A certification requirements. They will

learn to troubleshoot a system and peripherals using third party

diagnostic software and hardware available in todays market.

Students will learn how to provide continuing maintenance for the

personal computer and peripherals. An introduction to networks

and the Internet and connecting the personal computer to them is

covered.



Course Objectives:

1.   Students will be able to install and troubleshoot

  peripherals at the Interrupt and I/O address level.

2.   Students will be able to use software tools to repair and

  recover hard drives and other magnetic storage.

3.   Students will be able to install and troubleshoot video

  controllers and displays.

4.   Students will be able to install and troubleshoot printers

  of various types within the Windows operating environment.

5.   Students will be able to install and troubleshoot modems and

  NIC cards.

6.   Students will be able to install and troubleshoot multimedia

  devices.

7.   Students will be able to implement a preventive maintenance

  program for computers and peripherals as well as communicate

  effectively with their customer base regarding safety and

  maintenance needs.



Enabling Objectives:

All Sections: Students will identify and adhere to the safety

procedures specified in every lab. This will always include using

an ESD strap and unplugging the PC from external power whenever

the cover is off the PC or the components are being installed on

the motherboard. Students will always take these important steps

in addition to other component specific steps before proceeding

to work on the PC.



All Sections: Students will search for products and company

information via the web as needed in the lab assignments. They

will find URLs needed for any given application/specification.

They will use search strings in the product knowledge base to

configure and troubleshoot products (software and hardware), and

use listserv groups to enhance their knowledge of any given

subject. They will be able to locate, download, and apply the

patches. Students will use on-line and paper manuals to set up

and use products. Students will also search the web via browsers

to locate URLs that provide additional information about products

and specifications. Students, reinforcing and complimenting all

assignments inside and outside the classroom, will regularly seek

out the information on the web. (IL - satisfies the information

literacy component for all courses)



PART I Input/Output Devices

1.   Students will identify the port connectors that can be used

  in a PC.

2.   Students will list the various uses for the parallel port.

3.   Students will describe the function of a Centronics parallel

  interface.

4.   Students will explain the need for parallel/serial

  conversions.

5.   Students will explain how synchronous and asynchronous

  transmissions work and list the advantages and limitations of

  each.

6.   Students will explain the operation of an RS-232C serial

  interface port and define the signal lines.

7.   Students will explain how a Universal Serial Bus works.

8.   Students will list the three tasks a keyboard must perform

  to present data to the PC.

9.   Students will list the events that occur when a key is

  depressed on the keyboard.

10.  Students will list the steps to troubleshoot keyboard

  problems.

11.  Students will explain the operation of a mouse and a

  trackball.

12.  Students will describe the operation of a game port used

  with a joystick or a game paddle.

13.  Students will describe the operation of a light pen.

14.  Students will describe the operation of scanners.

15.  Students will list the steps to troubleshoot scanner

  problems.



PART II Magnetic Storage

1.   Students will describe the format of a hard disk.

2.   Students will list the events that occur during a track seek

  operation.

3.   Students will list the events that occur during a write

  operation.

4.   Students will list the events that occur during a read

  operation.

5.   Students will list the responsibilities of the FDD

  controller.

6.   Students will list the signal lines of a FDD signal cable.

7.   Students will list the steps to troubleshoot FDD problems.

8.   Students will identify the different connecting cables

  (SCSI, IDE, FDD).

9.   Students will list the differences between hard and floppy

  disk drive types.

10.  Students will install IDE and EIDE devices, configuring them

  for master/slave/single designations.

11.  Students will install and configure SCSI device chains.

12.  Students will configure SCSI device addresses and

  terminations to avoid conflicts and problems.

13.  Students will list the steps to troubleshoot HDD problems.

14.  Students will list the different RAID levels and when to use

  them.

15.  Students will list the different tape drive formats.



PART III Video Displays

1.   Students will explain how to position a single dot on the

  face of the CRT using raster scanning.

2.   Students will describe how a character generator is used to

  convert ACII-coded characters into screen images.

3.   Students will describe how color displays are created on the

  screen.

4.   Students will list the characteristics of MGA, CGA, HGA,

  EGA, and VGA videos.

5.   Students will describe the type of physical connector

  specified for VGA video.

6.   Students will explain how installed video memory affects the

  capabilities of a video adapter card.

7.   Students will explain how characters are processed in text

  mode.

8.   Students will list the steps to troubleshoot video problems.

9.   Students will list the safety considerations associated with

  working around a CRT.

10.  Students will list the components commonly found inside a

  CRT monitor.

11.  Students will list the steps to troubleshoot monitor

  problems.

12.  Students will list the symptoms associated with common

  monitor problems.

13.  Students will list the symptoms associated with the

  monitors video circuitry.

14.  Students will describe the operation of liquid crystal

  displays.

15.  Students will describe the operation of gas-plasma displays.



PART IV Printers

1.   Students will list the types of paper handling common to

  different printer technologies.

2.   Students will list special considerations that must be

  observed when installing or repairing serial printers.

3.   Students will identify types of cable connections between

  printer and PCs.

4.   Students will list the flow-control methods applied to

  serial printers.

5.   Students will list the troubleshooting techniques for dot-

  matrix printers.

6.   Students will list the symptoms associated with components

  of the dot-matrix printer.

7.   Students will describe the alignment procedures for

  printhead mechanisms.

8.   Students will describe the operation of an ink-jet printer.

9.   Students will identify the major components of an ink-jet

  printer.

10.  Students will list troubleshooting techniques for ink-jet

  printers.

11.  Students will list symptoms associated with components of an

  ink-jet printer.

12.  Students will explain the process for applying print to a

  page in a laser printer.

13.  Students will identify the major components of a laser

  printer.

14.  Students will list the troubleshooting techniques associated

  with laser printers.

15.  Students will list symptoms associated with components in a

  laser printer.



PART V Data Communications

1.   Students will describe the three types of modulation

  commonly used in data communications.

2.   Students will compare hardware and software oriented

  protocols.

3.   Students will list the steps to troubleshoot a modem

  problem.

4.   Students will differentiate among typical LAN topologies.

5.   Students will differentiate among the different types of

  network media.

6.   Students will list the steps to troubleshoot a LAN

  networking problem.

7.   Students will define the term wide area network (WAN).

8.   Students will list the basic concepts relating to Internet

  access.

9.   Students will describe the function of routers, hubs, and

  bridges.

10.  Students will describe the ISDN connection.

11.  Students will FTP a file from a server.

12.  Students will explain the term email and its functions.

13.  Students will explain various other Internet tools and their

  functions.

14.  Students will explain what the World Wide Web uses are.

15.  Students will explain what an Internet browser is and how it

is used.

16.  Students will list the steps to troubleshoot a WAN problem.



PART VI Multimedia

1.   Students will define the term multimedia.

2.   Students will list the current Windows multimedia support

  tools.

3.   Students will describe the function of multimedia authoring

  programs.

4.   Students will describe the operations of a CD-ROM drive.

5.   Students will install and configure a CD-ROM drive.

6.   Students will list the steps to troubleshoot a CD-ROM

  problem.

7.   Students will describe how audio signals are digitized.

8.   Students will install and configure a sound card.

9.   Students will explain the MIDI standard and discuss its use.

10.  Students will list the steps to troubleshoot a sound card.

11.  Students will list the characteristics of MPEG and JPEG

  compression formats.

12.  Students will install and configure a video capture card.

13.  Students will list the steps to troubleshoot a video capture

  card.

14.  Students will install and configure a VGA-TV adapter for

  operation.

15.  Students will list the steps to troubleshoot a VGA-TV card

  problem.



PART VII Preventive Maintenance and Safety

1.   Students will demonstrate the proper procedures to clean

  various system components.

2.   Students will define methods of preventing ESD hazards.

3.   Students will define the term ground.

4.   Students will define the two types of uninterruptable power

  supplies and state advantages and limitations of each.

5.   Students will list the various UPS specifications and state

  how to apply them in a given situation.

6.   Students will list the typical precautions that should be

  observed when working on computer equipment.

7.   Students will perform the generic preventive maintenance

  routines on a system and printer.

8.   Students will list the preventive maintenance procedures for

  hard and floppy disks.

9.   Students will perform basic disk-management functions on a

  hard drive.

10.  Students will use software utilities to identify and remove

  viruses from a computer system.

11.  Students will list the precautionary steps that should be

  taken when handling floppy disks.

12.  Students will list the steps to clean a dot-matrix, ink-jet,

  and laser printer.

13.  Students will establish and maintain preventive maintenance

  schedules for a group of systems.

14.  Students will list the potential hazards that are present

  when working with laser printers and monitors.

15.  Students will list the various customer service skills that

  lead to customer satisfaction.



PART VIII A Preparation

1.   Students will review all materials presented in ELT104

  Computer Repair I and ELT204 Computer Repair II.

2.   Students will take the A certification practice test

  included with the book.

3.   Students will visit web sites that help prepare for the A

  certification test.



Required Text: Andrews, Jean, Ph.D., Enhanced A Guide to

Managing and Maintaining Your PC, Enhanced, Course Technology, a

division of Thomson Learning



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: 50 of the grade is

determined by test grades. Six tests will be given throughout the

semester. 50 of the grade is determined by lab experiments and

homework. All lab assignments, procedures, and handouts will be

complete for each test area will be completed before students

take the test and will be reviewed after each test. All homework

must be typed and handed in by the due date assigned. No late

work or labs will be accepted.



Attendance: Students are expected to attend all scheduled

classes. They are expected to make up all missed work. Students

who miss a class are required to make up any missed lab before

the test for the section. Missed homework cannot be made up as

you have several different ways to hand it in on time including

face to face early or email. Any missed test must be completed by

the end of the next class after the test. Failure to do so will

result in a 0 for items missed.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an act

of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in this course,

academic probation, and/or suspension from the college. See the

student handbook for additional details.



Student Safety and Procedures: Students are required to follow

procedures for their own safety and the safety of others.

Specific procedures are to be adhered to when working with the PC

and equipment. These procedures will be demonstrated by the

instructor, detailed in handouts and procedures, and are an

intricate part of every lab. Should students have any doubts or

questions regarding a procedure, they should ask the instructor

before proceeding.



Software and Hardware Policies: The school is licensed to use all

software required in class and lab. Students will not be allowed

to copy software from the school PCs. It is an illegal act to

copy this software. Students will run the risk of dismissal from

the class and possibly the school if software is copied

illegally. Viruses can be transmitted through various media.

Students will take every precaution when working with the

schools software and hardware, adhering to the procedures for

protecting from viruses. Students will not bring their own

software to class, nor will they install it on any school PC.



Course Activities: Students will spend half the time in a

lecture/demonstration series by the instructor. The instructor

will use PowerPoint presentations, videos (taped and from the

Internet) and overhead projections from the instructors PC

during that time. The instructor will also use the PC to

demonstrate hands-on processes the students are expected to

learn. The other half of the time the students are expected to

reinforce the things learned in the lecture/demonstration in a

supervised instructor led lab. Student will use the PC to

gather information needed to do the hands-on lab portion. This

includes using the Internet to visit the sites of on-line

companies, and using all available on-line resources (knowledge

bases, on-line videos, on-line technical support, and on-line

product manuals) to complete labs as assigned. The PC is also the

center of the lab experience, as students will apply what they

have learned via installing and configuring software and hardware

on the personal computer.



Course Content outline:

I.   Input/Output Devices

     a.   I/O ports

     b.   Troubleshooting Port Conflicts

     c.   Troubleshooting Input Devices



II.  Magnetic Storage

     a.   Magnetic Disks

     b.   Floppy Disk Drives

     c.   Hard Disk Drives

     d.   RAID systems

     e.   Tape Drives

     

III. Video Displays

     a.   Color Monitors and Graphics

     b.   Video Standards

     c.   Integrated Video Controllers

     d.   Troubleshooting and Repairing Monitors

     e.   Other Display Types



IV.  Printers

     a.   Printer Types and Settings

     b.   Dot-Matrix Printers

     c.   Ink-Jet Printers

     d.   Laser Printers

     e.   Installing printer drivers

     f.   Troubleshooting Windows Printer Problems

     

V.   Data Communications

     a.   Modems

     b.   Local Area Networks

     c.   Wide Area Networks

     

VI.  Multimedia

     a.   Multimedia Applications

     b.   CD-ROM

     c.   Sound Cards

     d.   Video Capture Cards

     e.   VGA to TV Converters

     

VII. Preventive Maintenance and Safety

     a.   Customer Service

     b.   Preventive Maintenance for Components

     c.   Safety

     d.   Communication Skills and Customer Service



VIII.     A Preparation
