5



IT 104

Computer Repair I

Credits: 4

Pre-Requisites: Completion of EN 098, EN 099 and MA 091, if

required

Revised Syllabi Fall 2002



Donna Dobie

Department Co-Chair: Business, Computer, and Technical Studies

dobiesalemcc.edu



Course Description: This course will parallel components covered

on the A certification examined by CompTia. Students will learn

the functions of various components of the PC and basic

replacement of components that have failed. They will also learn

how to configure components such as IDE and SCSI devices and

adapter cards. They will learn the correct procedures for

installing and configuring peripheral devices. They will learn to

troubleshoot and isolate systems problems using standard

troubleshooting techniques. Safety procedures in working with PCs

and maintenance steps will also be stressed.



Course Objectives:

1.   Students will be able to use and understand computer words

  and identify the structure of hardware.

2.   Students will be able to identify the major hardware

  components that make up a personal computer.

3.   Students will be able to identify common problems and use

  basic troubleshooting procedures to isolate system parts.

4.   Students will be able to understand the structure of an

  operating system and be able to load and configure the Windows

  95/98/2000 operating system.

5.   Students will be able to identify system board parts and

  select appropriate board parts when installing a motherboard.

6.   Students will be able to safely disassemble and correctly

  reassemble the personal computer using procedures that promote

  safety for the technician and computer parts.



Enabling Objectives:

All Sections: Students will explain and adhere to the safety

procedures specified in every lab. This will always include using

an ESD strap and unplugging the PC from external power whenever

the cover is off the PC or the components are being installed on

the motherboard. Students will always take these important steps

in addition to other component specific steps before proceeding to

work on the PC.



All Sections: Students will search for products and company

information via the web as needed in the lab assignments. They

will find URLs needed for any given application/specification.

They will use search strings in the product knowledge base to

configure and troubleshoot products (software and hardware), and

use listserv groups to enhance their knowledge of any given

subject. They will be able to locate patches for products and

download and apply the patches. Students will use on-line and

paper manuals to set up and use products. Students will also

search the web via browsers to locate URLs that provide additional

information about products and specifications. Students,

reinforcing and complimenting all assignments inside and outside

the classroom, will regularly seek out the information on the web.

(IL - satisfies the information literacy component for all

courses)



Part I Microprocessor Fundamentals

1.   Students will define the computer term word and describe

  the three types used.

2.   Students will state common work size and relate the terms

  bit, byte and nibble to the word sizes.

3.   Students will define hardware, software, and firmware.

4.   Students will describe the functions of the four fundamental

  blocks that form a computer.

5.   Students will identify primary and secondary memory.

6.   Students will differentiate between static and dynamic RAM

  and give examples of how each is used.

7.   Students will list the three major buses and describe how

  information is carried by each.

8.   Students will identify the relationship between the size of

  the address bus and individual memory and I/O locations that

  access it.

9.   Students will explain the function of the instruction set.

10.  Students will define the functions of the I/O units.

11.  Students will describe the four common methods of I/O data

  transfer.

12.  Students will explain the function to the ROM BIOS.

13.  Students will explain the function and usage of DOS.

14.  Students will identify the graphical user interface and its

  uses.

15.  Students will identify popular software applications in use

  today.



Part II PC Hardware

1.   Students will identify the components (power supply, system

  board, system speaker, disk drive unit, and expansion slots) by

  sight.

2.   Students will differentiate between PC case styles and list

  advantages and limitations of each.

3.   Students will state the unique features of a laptop computer.

4.   Students will describe the functions of the power supply.

5.   Students will identify system RAM banks visually and with

  accompanying documentation identify the amount of RAM installed.

6.   Students will identify the different types of RAM modules.

7.   Students will calculate maximum RAM for each type of module.

  (Maximum RAM  maximum RAM per module type x number of banks)

8.   Students will identify common IC package types.

9.   Students will identify PCMCIA devices and their uses.

10.  Students will identify a VGA adapter card.

11.  Students will identify a Multi-I/O card.

12.  Students will identify hard drive types.

13.  Students will identify common external devices.



Part III Troubleshooting PC Hardware

1.   Students will describe and use a safe and useful workspace.

2.   Students will perform the following functions with a

  multimeter: voltage, resistance, and current checks.

3.   Students will identify common DMM tests that can be used in

  troubleshooting a PC.

4.   Students will perform visual inspections of PCs.

5.   Students will describe the three general categories of

  problems into which symptoms can be grouped and differences

  between each group.

6.   Students will use a disk-based diagnostic tool to isolate

  system problems.

7.   Students will describe the functions of a PSOT card and use

  the card to isolate system problems.

8.   Students will create and use DOS batch files to test selected

  parts of the system.

9.   Students will list the quick checks that can be used to

  determine the nature of hardware problems.

10.  Students will describe the process of FRU-level

  troubleshooting.

11.  Students will describe the steps for isolating power supply

  problems.

12.  Students will describe and use the checks for isolating

  problems in a dead system.

13.  Students will describe additional methods of troubleshooting

  symptoms that are not well defined as well as escape component

  based troubleshooting techniques.



PART IV the Operating System

1.   Students will describe the two basic types of operating

  systems.

2.   Students will define multi-user, multitasking, and

  multiprocessor operations.

3.   Students will describe the series of electrical events that

  occur when the system power is turned on.

4.   Students will configure system components through CMOS setup.

5.   Students will list the boot-up events as they occur during

  the boot-up process.

6.   Students will describe the basic organization of a DOS disk.

7.   Students will describe the function of the DOS command line

  or prompt.

8.   Students will list the rules for naming DOS files and

  directories.

9.   Students will describe and use methods of bypassing and

  correcting DOS startup sequence problems.

10.  Students will test I/O ports in DOS mode.

11.  Students will describe the different types of DOS memory.

12.  Students will create and use the autoexec.bat and config.sys

   files to optimize performance.

13.  Students will load drives for devices on the system.

14.  Students will list the steps used for troubleshooting DOS

   problems.

15.  Students will install Windows using different setup modes.

16.  Students will list the core files that make up the Windows

  structures.

17.  Students will configure typical Control Panel values.

18.  Students will list the ini files and their functions.

19.  Students will explain multitasking in Windows.

20.  Students will describe security measures that are used in

   multi-user and network systems.

21.  Students will create a boot disk or startup disk for

   troubleshooting Windows problems.

22.  Students will state the major differences between Windows

   versions.

23.  Students will describe the Windows boot sequence.

24.  Students will manipulate the registry in Windows.

25.  Students will configure policies in Windows.

26.  Students will troubleshoot Windows using safe mode.



PART V Systems Boards

1.   Students will define AT-compatible interrupt and DMA

  addresses.

2.   Students will list the advantages of chip-set-based circuit

  design.

3.   Students will identify various microprocessors by their

  packaging type.

4.   Students will define real, protected, and virtual addressing

modes.

5.   Students will describe the major attributes of todays PC.

6.   Students will describe the internal structure of an IPC IC.

7.   Students will describe the functions of the real-time clock.

8.   Students will describe the functions of the Timer/Counters

   output signals.

9.   Students will list the events of a typical interrupt

operation.





10.  Students will identify the conditions under which a NMI will

   occur.

11.  Students will describe the functions of DMA operations and

   the different modes of DMA transfers.

12.  Students will describe static and dynamic RAM devices, and

   state under which conditions each will be used by an application.

13.  Students will describe first and second level cache memory.

14.  Students will list the steps used to troubleshoot system

   board problems.

15.  Students will list the error messages associated with system

   board problems.

16.  Students will list the symptoms associated with system board

   problems.



PART VI Assembling and disassembling the PC

1.   Students will list the safety features and procedures used

  when opening a PC case.

2.   Students will list the safety features used when removing a

  defective component.

3.   Students will list the safety features used when replacing a

  defective component.

4.   Students will troubleshoot and disassemble a PC.

5.   Students will replace any defective parts and reassemble the

PC.



Required Text: Andrews, Jean, Ph.D., Enhanced A Guide to Managing

and Maintaining Your PC, Enhanced, Course Technology, a division

of Thomson Learning

                                 

Saxton, Clint, Enhanced A Lab Manual for Guide to Managing and

Maintaining Your PC, Enhanced, Course Technolgy, a division of

Thomson Learning

                                 

CBT and Pocket Guide



Bundle ISBN 0619072393



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: 50 of the grade is

determined by test grades. Six tests will be given throughout the

semester. 50 of the grade is determined by completed lab

experiments and homework.



Attendance: Students are expected to attend all scheduled classes.

They are expected to make up all missed work. Students who miss a

class are required to make up its contents (labs, homework, and

tests) within two weeks of the absence. Failure to do so will

result in a 0 for items missed.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an act

of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in this course,

academic probation, and/or suspension from the college. See the

student handbook for additional details.



Student Safety and Procedures: Students are required to follow

procedures for their own safety and the safety of others. Specific

procedures are to be adhered to when working with the PC and

equipment. These procedures will be demonstrated by the

instructor, detailed in handouts and procedures, and are an

intricate part of every lab. Should students have any doubts or

questions regarding a procedure, they should ask the instructor

before proceeding.



Software and Hardware Policies: The school is licensed to use all

software required in class and lab. Students will not be allowed

to copy software from the school PCs. It is an illegal act to copy

this software. Students will run the risk of dismissal from the

class and possibly the school if software is copied illegally.

Viruses can be transmitted through various media. Students will

take every precaution when working with the schools software and

hardware, adhering to the procedures for protecting from viruses.

Students will not bring their own software to class, nor will they

install it on any school PC.



Course Activities: Students will spend half the time in a

lecture/demonstration series by the instructor. The instructor

will use PowerPoint presentations, videos (taped and from the

Internet) and overhead projections from the instructors PC during

that time. The instructor will also use the PC to demonstrate

hands-on processes the students are expected to learn. The other

half of the time the students are expected to reinforce the things

learned in the lecture/demonstration in a supervised instructor

led lab. Student will use the PC to gather information needed to

do the hands-on lab portion. This includes using the Internet to

visit the sites of on-line companies and using all available on-

line resources (knowledge bases, on-line videos, on-line technical

support, and on-line product manuals) to complete labs as

assigned. The PC is also the center of the lab experience, as

students will apply what they have learned via installing and

configuring software and hardware on the personal computer.



Course Content outline:

I.   Microprocessor Fundamentals

     a.   Computer Words

     b.   Basic Hardware Structures

     c.   input/output

     d.   Software



II.  PC Hardware

     a.   Power Supply

     b.   System Boards

     c.   Expansion Slots

     d.   Adapter Cards

     e.   Disk Drives

     f.   System Speakers

     g.   Peripherals

     

III. Troubleshooting PC Hardware

     a.   Tools and Work Space

     b.   Troubleshooting Steps

     c.   Software Diagnostics

     d.   Hardware Troubleshooting



IV.  The Operating System

     a.   Basic input/output

     b.   DOS

     c.   Microsoft Windows

     

V. System Boards

     a.   Microprocessors and support systems

     b.   Memory

     c.   On-Board I/O

     d.   Expansion Slots

     e.   PCMIA Slots

     f.   System Board upgrading

     g.   System Board Troubleshooting



VI. Assembling and disassembling the PC

       
