            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College MAT240 Course Syllabus

MAT240  Linear Algebra Credits: 4:0:4 Prerequisite:  Mat 232 or written permission of Asst. Dean of 
Academic Affairs Co-requisite: None
Contact: John Steiner 856-351-2638 jsteiner@salemcc.edu.
Course Description: This course is designed for students who need preparation for higher levels 
of mathematics.  Topics include Linear equations, Matrix Algebra, Determinants, Vector Spaces, 
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, and Orthogonality and Least squares.  Applications will be used 
extensively throughout.  A TI graphing calculator is required.
Place in the College Curriculum:
This course is required in the Mathematics option of the Liberal Arts Degree.  This course can be taken 
as a 4 credit Mathematics elective.Date of Last Revisions: November 2008
Course Content Outline:I. Linear Equations in Linear Algebra A. Solution Sets of Linear Systems 
B.Applications of Linear Systems C.Linear Independence D.Introduction to Linear Transformations E. The 
Matrix of a Linear Transformation F.Linear Models in Business, Science, and Engineering II.Matrix 
Algebra A.Matrix Operations B.The Inverse of a Matrix 
C.Characterizations of Invertible Matrices D.Partitioned Matrices E.Matrix Factorizations F.The Leontief 
Input-Output Model G.Applications to Computer Graphics H.Subspace of Rn  I.Dimension and Rank III. 
Determinants A.Introduction to Determinants B.Properties of Determinants C.Cramer?s Rule, Volume, and 
Linear Transformations IV.Vector Spaces A.Vector Spaces and Subspaces B.Null spaces, Column 
Spaces, and Linear Transformations C.Linearly Independent Sets; Bases D.Coordinate Systems E.The 
Dimension of a Vector Space F.Rank G.Change of Basis H.Applications to Difference Equations 
I.Applications to Markov Chains V. Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors A.Eigenvectors and Eigenvalues B.The 
Characteristic Equation C.Diagonalization D.Eigenvectors and Linear Transformations E.Complex 
Eigenvalues F.Discrete Dynamical Systems G.Applications to Differential Equations H.Iterative 
Estimates for Eigenvalues VI. Orthogonality and Least Squares A.Inner Product, Length, and 
Orthogonality B.Orthogonal Sets C.Orthogonal Projections D.The Gram-Schmidt Process E.Least-
Squares Problems F. Applications to Linear Models B.Inner Product Spaces C.Applications of Inner 
Product Space
Course Performance Objective #1:The student will use linear equations to solve application 
programs.Course Performance Objective #2:The student will perform matrix algebra.
Course Performance Objective #3:The student will demonstrate concepts involving determinants.Course 
Performance Objective #4:The student will define and evaluate vector spaces.Course Performance 
Objective #5:The student will apply Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors.Course Performance Objective 
#6:The student will evaluate and construct least squares linesGeneral Education Requirements: The 
general education goals covered in ?Linear Algebra? are critical thinking & problem solving, quantitative 
skills, and science & technology.  See student handbook for additional details. Outcomes 
Assessment:A college-wide outcomes assessment program has been put into place to enhance the 
quality and effectiveness of the curriculum and programs at Salem Community College.  As part of this 
assessment program, the learning outcomes for this course will be assessed.  Assessment methods 
may include tests, quizzes, papers, reports, projects and other instruments.  Copies of all outcomes 
assessments are available in an electronic assessment bank maintained by the Institutional Research and 
Planning Office.
Course Activities: Students will learn from lectures during which new material will be delivered, small 
group discussions, individual explorations, practice work, and discussion of assigned homework 
problems.  Students will have the opportunity to investigate the Linear Algebra concepts using some 
computer software.Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:Please refer to the instructor?s 
syllabus addendum (to be distributed in class) for specific information regarding the course requirements 
and means of evaluation.Attendance:  Regular and prompt attendance in all classes is expected of 
students.  Students absent from class for any reason are responsible for making up any missed work.  
Faculty members establish an attendance policy for each course and it is the student?s responsibility to 
honor and comply with that policy.Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an act 
of academic dishonesty may be subject to failure of this course, academic probation, and / or 
suspension from the college. See the Student Handbook for additional details. Required Texts:Lay. 
Linear Algebra and Its Application with CD-ROM, update, Addison-Wesley, 3rd Edition. ? 2008, 
Lay. Student Study Guide Update, Addison-Wesley, ? 2006						
		
		Page 2
