            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College MAT 110 Course Syllabus



MAT 110 Introduction to College Mathematics: Credits:  3:0:3, Prerequisite: 
MA 090 completion and placement following appropriate accuplacer testing 

score. Co-Requisite: None



Contact Karen Mattison (856) 351-2672, kmattisonsalemcc.edu



                  Course Description: This course is designed to provide 
students with a solid introduction to college mathematics with an array of 
topics pertinent to a well 

rounded background in math. Major topics include but are not limited to:   
Arithmetic, Calculators, and Problem Solving: Sets of Numbers Introduction 
to 

Algebra Percents and Problem Solving Introduction to Geometry Measurement 
and Problem Solving Application of Percent Sets and Logic Probability 

Statistics.  The course has a refreshing approach to math instruction going 
so far as to address math anxiety at the outset of the content. The first 
half of the 

course pertains to the power of mathematics.  The attempt is made to develop 
an appreciation for mathematics by promoting the intrinsic power of the 

subject.  The cause and effects of math anxiety is explored with natural 
steps to make the learning of math more appropriate and applicable to the 

individual, hoping to abate any fears.   The second half of the course 
focuses on the utility of mathematics, or in other words how we can use 
mathematics 

in our day to day lives.  Real life problems of the day are presented in 
this section. Place in College curriculum: This course is a mathematics 
elective for 

certificate and degree programs at SCC. 

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 1:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of basic Arithmetic principals: 

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 2:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of basic numeric operations 

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 3:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of basic Algebraic principals: 

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 4:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of the relationship between percents, decimals, and 

fractions:

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 5:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of the basic principals of geometry: 

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 6:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of computations of area, circumference, volume and 

perimeters

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 7:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of basic principals of sets and logic: 

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 8:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of basic principals of Probability: 

COURSE PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVE 9:  The student will demonstrate an 
understanding of basic principals of Statistics: 

Required Text: Thompson, Brooks, Cole, MATHEMATICS  ITS POWER AND UTILITY, 
Author  Karl J. Smith  eighth edition, 2006. 

Optional Text: None   Materials and Supplies:CalculatorAdditional Costs: 
None 

General Education Goals: The Mat 110 course includes topics and activities 
that address the following general education goals: 

Critical thinking and problem solving Information Literacy Quantitative 
skills . 

Course Activities:  Lecture is used to introduce all course content.  
Collaborative activities will be embraced in class thereby giving the 
students an 

opportunity to practice and absorb what has been presented and demonstrated, 
clarifying and reinforcing the knowledge.  They must then practice the 

work at home by doing their assignments.  The student should attempt all 
collaborative and home  work activities.    Students will be shown how to 
use an 

electronic hand-held calculator for computation and the computer (Web) and 
applicable tutorial software covering the class assignments. 

Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: Students will be tested in 
class on all course content.  Students will be given exams on each topic.  
The 

instructor may also use quizzes and class participation as components of the 
final grade.    The instructor will specify to the class during the first 
week of 

classes the percent each evaluation component will contribute to the final 
grade. 

See the instructors syllabus addendum for specific course requirements.  

Grading Scale: 

93  100  A, 90  92  A-, 88  89  B, 83  87  B, 80  82  B-, 78  79  C, 73  77  
C, 70  72  C-, 68  69  D, 60  67  D, 

59  below  F, Failure due to attendance  FA.

Outline of Course Content:

PART ONE:  THE POWER OF MATHEMATICS 

I.  Arithmetic, Calculators, and Problem Solving: A.   Math Anxiety, B. 
Formulating the Problem, C. Fractions and Decimals, D. Rounding and 
Estimation, E. 

Exponents and Prime Factorization,  F. Common Factors, G.    Adding and 
Subtracting Fractions, H. Hindu  Arabic Numeration System, I. Different 

Numeration Systems

 II. Sets of Numbers: A. Symbol Shock:  B.  Addition of Integers,  C.  
Subtraction of Integers, D.  Multiplication of Integers, 

E.Division of Integers, F.  Rational and Irrational Numbers. 

III. Introduction to Algebra:  A. Polynomials,  B.  Similar Terms,  C.  
Simplification,   D.  Equations,  E.  Solving Equations, 

F.Problem Solving With Algebra, G.  Inequalities. 

IV. Percents And Problem Solving:  A.Ratio and Proportion,  B. Problem 
Solving with Proportions,   C.  Percent,  D.  Problem Solving With Percent 

V.  Introduction to Geometry:  A. Euclidean Geometry,   B. Polygon and 
Angles, C. Triangles, D. Similar Triangles 

VI.  Measurement and Problem Solving:  A.Precision, Accuracy, and 
Estimation,  B.  Perimeter,   C.  Area,  D.  Volume and Capacity,  E. 

Miscellaneous Measurements,  F.Converting Units - Metric measurement 
conversions. 

PART TWO- THE UTILITY OF MATHEMATICS

VII. Application of Percent:  A. Discount, Sale Price, and Sales Tax, B. 
Simple Interest, C. Buying on Credit, D. Compound Interest, 

E.  Buying a home.

VIII.  Sets and Logic:  A.Introduction to Sets,  B. Subsets,  C.  Operations 
with sets,  D.  Venn Diagrams,  E.  Survey problems using sets,  F. 
Inductive 

and Deductive Reasoning.

IX.   Probability:  A. Introduction to Probability,  B.  Probability Models, 
 C.Odds and Conditional Probability, 

D.  Mathematical Expectation. 

X.  Statistics:  A.Frequency Distribution Graphs,  B. Measures of Central 
Tendency. 
