            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College MA 90 Course Syllabus



MA 90 Basic College Mathematics: Course Credits: 4:0:4, Prerequisite: MA 90 
placement on college placement Test, Co-Requisite: 

None



Contact Karen Mattison (856) 351-2672, kmattisonsalemcc.edu



Course Description: This course is designed to provide students with the 
concepts and skills necessary for further study in Elementary 

Algebra, or in general education mathematics course, Applied Mathematics, or 
in Mathematics for Nursing.  Topics will include the four 

basic arithmetic operations as applied to whole numbers, fractions, 
decimals, and rational problem solving.  The concepts and skills of 

MA 90 are introduced through lecture, perspective learning and 
individualized instruction, utilizing computerized, programmed materials, 

the lab activities support, reinforce and continue the content presented in 
class. (Credits do not apply toward graduation requirements.) 

Place in College Curriculum:This course is used to build academic 
competencies of students who lack appropriatemathematical 

proficiencies required for entry into college curriculum of their choice

Course Performance Objective 1: The student will simplify expressions and 
solve arithmetic applications requiring operations with 

whole numbers.  Course Performance Objective 2: The student will simplify 
expressions and solve arithmetic applications requiring 

operations with fractions.  Course Performance Objective 3: The student will 
simplify expressions and solve arithmetic applications 

requiring operations with decimals.  Course Performance Objective 4: The 
student will write ratios, rates and proportions, solve 

proportions, and use these skills in arithmetic applications.  Course 
Performance Objective 5: The student will perform 

conversions between decimals, fractions, mixed numbers and percents and 
solve the three types of percent problems. 

Course Performance Objective 6: The student will perform operations with 
rational numbers. 

General Education Requirements: The general education goals covered in Basic 
College Mathematics are critical 

thinking and problem solving, quantitative skills, and science and 
technology.  See Student Handbook for additional 

details.

Required Text: Aufmann, Richard N., Vernon C. Baker, and Joanne S. Lockwood, 
Basic College Mathematics: An 

Applied Approach. 8th edition, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2005.

Course Activities: Content will be delivered by means of lecture, group 
discussion, and laboratory exercises including 

collaborative work as well as calculator and computer investigations.  The 
student will have the opportunity to explore 

mathematics weekly to reinforce the content he/she is learning in class.

Means of Evaluation:  Students will be evaluated on tests, quizzes, and 
homework and class participation. 

Course Content Outline:

I.  Whole Numbers: A. Introduction to Whole Numbers 1.To identify the order 
relation between two numbers, 2. To write whole 

numbers in words and in standard form, 3. To write whole numbers in expanded 
form, 4. To round a whole number to a given place 

value B.  Addition of Whole Numbers 1. To add whole numbers without 
carrying, 2. To add whole numbers with carrying, 3. To solve 

application problems, C. Subtraction of Whole Numbers 1. To subtract whole 
numbers without borrowing, 2. To subtract whole numbers 

with borrowing, 3. To solve application problems, D.Multiplication of Whole 
Numbers: 1. To multiply a number by a single digit, 

2. To multiply larger whole numbers, 3. To solve Application Problems, E. 
Division of Whole Numbers 1. To divide by a single digit with 

no remainder in the Quotient, 2. To divide by a single digit with a 
remainder in the Quotient, 3. To divide by larger whole Numbers, 4. To 

solve application Problems, F.Exponential Notation and the Order of 
Operations Agreement 1. To simplify expressions containing 

Exponents, 2. To use the Order of Operations Agreement to simplify 
expressions, G. Prime Numbers and Factoring,, 1. To factor 

numbers, 2. To find the prime factorization of a number

II. Fractions:  A. The Least Common Multiple and Greatest Common Factor 1. 
To find the least common multiple, 2. To find the greatest 

common factor, B. Introduction to Fractions 1. To write a fraction that 
represents part of a whole, 2. To write an improper fraction as a 

mixed number or a whole number, and a mixed number as an improper fraction, 
C. Writing Equivalent Fractions 1. To find equivalent 

fractions by raising to higher terms, 2.To write a fraction in simplest 
form,  D. Addition of Fractions and Mixed Numbers 1. To add 

fractions with the same denominator, 2. To add fractions with unlike 
denominators, 3. To add whole numbers, mixed numbers, and 

fractions, 4. To solve application problems E.Subtraction of Fractions and 
Mixed Numbers 1. To subtract fractions with the same 

denominator, 2. To subtract fractions with unlike denominators, 3. To 
subtract whole numbers, mixed numbers, and fractions, 4. To solve 

application problems, F.Multiplication of Fractions and Mixed Numbers 1. To 
multiply fractions, 2. To multiply whole numbers, mixed 

numbers, and fractions, 3. To solve application problems, G.Division of 
Fractions and Mixed Numbers 1. To divide Fractions, 2. To 

divide whole numbers, mixed numbers, and fractions, 3. To solve application 
problems, H.Order, Exponents, and the Order of 

Operations Agreement 1. To identify the order relation between two 
fractions, 2. To simplify expressions containing exponents, 3. To use 

the Order of Operations Agreement to simplify expressions

III. Decimals: A. Introduction to Decimals 1. To write decimals in standard 
form and in words, 2. To round a decimal to a given place 

value, B. Addition of Decimals 1. To add decimals, 2. To solve application 
problems, C. Subtraction of Decimals, 1. To subtract decimals, 

2. To solve application problems, D. Multiplication of Decimals 1. To 
multiply decimals,2. To solve application problems, E. Division of 

Decimals 1. To divide decimals, 2. To solve application problems, F. 
Comparing and Converting Fractions and Decimals 1. To convert 

fractions to decimals, 2. To convert decimals to fractions, 3. To identify 
the order relation between two decimals or between a decimal and 

a fraction

IV. Ratio and Proportion: A. Ratio 1. To write the ratio of two quantities 
in simplest form, 2. To solve application 

problems, B. Rates 1. To write rates, 2. To write unit rates, 3. To solve 
application problems, C. Proportions 1. To 

determine if a proportion is true, 2. To solve proportions, 3. To solve 
application problems 

V.  Percents: A. Introduction to Percents: 1. To write a percent as a 
fraction or decimal, 2. To write a fraction or a decimal 

as a percent, B. Percent Equations:  Part I, 1. To find the amount when the 
percent and base are given, 2. To solve 

application problems, C. Percent Equations:  Part II 1 To find the percent 
when the base and amount are given, 2. To 

solve application problems, D. Percent Equations: Part III 1. To find the 
base when the percent and amount are given, 2. 

To solve application problems, E. Percent Problems:  Proportion Method 1. To 
solve percent problems using proportions, 

2. To solve application problems

VI. Supplemental Topics: A. Complex Fractions 1. To simplify complex 
fractions, B. Square Roots, 1. To find the square 

root of perfect squares, 2. To estimate the square root of numbers which are 
not perfect squares, C. Perimeter 

1. To find the perimeter of rectangles, 2.To solve application problems, D. 
Solving Equations 1. To solve equations using 

a replacement set
