MAT136

INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA

Credits:  4

Prerequisite:  College Placement Test or MAT093 or written

               permission of instructor

Revised Syllabi Fall 2002



Howard Valentine

Department Chair, Mathematics

valentinesalemcc.edu



Course Description: This course is designed to enable students to

               become very proficient in the

               manipulative skills of traditional algebra.  Students

               will investigate algebra both analytically and

               graphically.  Major topics include functions, linear

               equations and inequalities, properties of lines,

               systems of equations, exponents and polynomials,

               factoring, rational expressions, radical expressions,

               and quadratic equations.  Methods of instruction

               include lecture, group discussion, and graphical

               analysis on both the graphing calculator and

               computer.  The weekly labs focus on the topics of the

               week and will consist of one of the following:  a

               challenging problem set that the students work on

               collaboratively, a graphing calculator investigation,

               or a computer experiment where the students

               investigate mathematics in an applied mode.





Performance Objective 1:  The students will analyze functions.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given a function, the student will find its value at a number

  in its domain analytically and graphically.

2.   Given a function, the student will simplify its difference

quotient.

3.   Given a polynomial function, the student will find its domain

analytically and graphically.

4.   Given a rational function, the student will find its domain

analytically and graphically.

5.   Given a radical function, the student will find its domain

analytically and graphically.

6.   Given a polynomial function, the student will find its range

analytically and graphically.

7.   Given a rational function, the student will find its range

graphically.

8.   Given a radical function, the student will find its range

analytically and graphically.





Performance Objective 2:  The students will solve linear equations

and inequalities.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given a linear equation in one variable, the student will solve

  it analytically and graphically.

2.   Given a linear equation in more than one variable, the student

will solve for one of the variables in terms of the other variable.

3.   Given a linear equation, the student will determine whether it

is a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction

analytically and graphically.

4.   Given a linear inequality, the student will solve it

analytically and graphically.

5.   Given a solution to an inequality, the student will write it

using interval notation.

6.   Given a compound inequality using the work and, the student

will solve it analytically and graphically and express the answer

using interval notation.

7.   Given a compound inequality using the word or, the student

will solve it analytically and graphically and express the answer

using interval notation.

8.   Given a double inequality, the student will solve it

analytically and graphically and express the answer using interval

notation.

9.   Given an absolute value equation, the student will solve it and

determine if any solutions are extraneous.

10.  Given an absolute value inequality, the student will rewrite it

as a compound inequality.

11.  Given an absolute value inequality, the student will solve it

and express the answer using interval notation.



                                                                    

Performance Objective 3:  The student will find and analyze

equations of lines.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given two points on a line, the student will find the slope of

  the line.

2.   Given the equation of a line, the student will find the slope

of the line.

3.   Given two points or the slope and a point, the student will use

the point-slope form of the equation of a line to find its equation.

4.   Given the slope and y-intercept, the student will use the slope-

intercept form of the equation of a line to find its equation.

5.   Given the line is vertical, the student will find its equation

and its slope.

6.   Given the line is horizontal, the student will find its

equation and its slope.

7.   Given the equation of a line and point not on the line, the

student will find the slope of the line parallel to the given line

and will find the equation of the parallel line through the given

point.

8.   Given the equation of a line and a point not on the line, the

student will find the slope of the line perpendicular to the given

line and find the equation of the perpendicular line through the

given point.





Performance Objective 4:  The student will manipulate polynomials.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given an exponent problem, the student will use the product,

  quotient, power, product to a power, and quotient to a power

  rules correctly.

2.   Given an exponent problem, the student will interpret a zero

exponent and a negative exponent correctly.

3.   Given a polynomial addition problem, the student will add

correctly.

4.   Given a polynomial subtraction problem, the student will

subtract correctly.

5.   Given a monomial and a polynomial, the student will be able to

multiply correctly.

6.   Given two polynomials, the student will multiply correctly.

7.   Given a monomial and a polynomial, the student will divide

correctly.

8.   Given two polynomials, the student will divide correctly.

9.   Given a polynomial, the student will divide by s-a using

synthetic division.

                                                                    

Performance Objective 5:  The student will completely factor

polynomials.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given a polynomial, the student will identify and factor the

  greatest common factor from the polynomial.

2.   Given a polynomial that can be factored by grouping, the

student will factor.

3.   Given a binomial that is a difference of squares, the student

will factor.

4.   Given a trinomial with a leading coefficient o one, the student

will factor.

5.   Given a trinomial with a leading coefficient not one, the

student will factor.

6.   Given a binomial that is a sum of cubes, the student will

factor.

7.   Given a binomial that is a difference of cubes, the student

will factor.





Performance Objective 6:  The student will simplify rational

expressions and solve rational equations.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given a rational expression, the student will reduce to lowest

  terms.

2.   Given two or more rational expressions, the student will

multiply and leave answer in lowest terms.

3.   Given two rational expressions, the student will divide and

leave answer in lowest terms.

4.   Given two or more rational expressions, the student will add

and leave answer in lowest terms.

5.   Given two rational expressions, the student will subtract and

leave answer in lowest terms.

6.   Given a complex fraction, the student will simplify.

7.   Given a rational equation, the student will solve analytically

and graphically and determine if any solutions are extraneous.





Performance Objective 7:  The student will simplify radical

expressions and solve radical equations.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given an expression with rational exponents, the student will

  simplify using the properties of exponents.

2.   Given a radical expression, the student will simplify.

3.   Given two or more radical expressions, the student will

multiply and/or divide and leave answers simplified.

4.   Given a radical equation, the student will solve analytically

and graphically and determine if any solutions are extraneous.

5.   Given a complex number, the student will write in a  bi

form.

6.   Given two complex numbers, the student will add an/or subtract.

7.   Given two complex numbers, the student will multiply and/or

divide.



                                                                    

Performance Objective 8:  The student will solve quadratic

equations.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given a quadratic equation, the student will solve by

  factoring, if possible.

2.   Given a quadratic equation, the student will solve by

completing the square.

3.   Given a quadratic equation, the student will solve by using the

quadratic formula.

4.   Given a quadratic equation, the student will be able to solve

graphically.

5.   Given an equation, quadratic in type, the student will be able

to solve.

6.   Given a nonlinear inequality, the student will be able to solve

and express the answer using interval notation.





Performance Objective 9:  The student will solve systems of linear

equations.



Enabling Objectives:

1.   Given a 2 x 2 linear system, the student will solve both

  analytically and graphically.

2.   Given a 3 x 3 linear system, the student will solve

analytically.



                                                                    

Required Text: Wright, D. Franklin and Bill D. New, Intermediate

               Algebra, 4th ed., Hawkes Publishing.



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:

               Quizzes (5 or more) 10 points each

               Exams (3 or more) 100 points each

               Final Exam (comprehensive) 200 points

               Lab Activities (best 13 of 15, 5 points each) 65

               points



Course Grade:  (based on a percentage of total possible points)



               A    93 - 100

               A-   90 - 92

               B   88 - 89

               B    83 - 87

               B-   80 - 82

               C   78 - 79

               C    73 - 77

               C-   70 - 72

               D   68 - 69

               D    60 - 67

               F     59



Attendance:  Students are expected to attend all scheduled classes.



Academic Honesty Policy: Students found to have committed an act of

                    academic dishonesty may be subject to failure in

                    this course, academic probation, and/or

                    suspension from the college.  See the Student

                    Handbook for additional details.

Course Activities:  Content will be delivered by means of lecture,

               group discussion, and laboratory exercises including

               collaborative work as well as calculator and computer

               investigations.  The student will have the

               opportunity to explore mathematics weekly to

               reinforce the content he/she is learning in class.







Course Content Outline:



  I.   Functions

       A.   Notation

B.   Domain

C.   Range



  II.  Linear equations and inequalities

       A.   Solve linear equations

B.   Solve linear inequalities

C.   Solve compound inequalities

D.   Solve absolute value equations

E.   Solve absolute value inequalities



  III. Properties of Lines

       A.   Slope

B.   Find equation satisfying given conditions

C.   Vertical and horizontal lines

D.   Parallel and perpendicular lines



  IV.  Polynomials

       A.   Monomial arithmetic

B.   Addition

C.   Subtraction

D.   Multiplication

E.   Long division

F.   Synthetic division



  V.   Factoring

       A.   Greatest common factor

B.   Grouping

C.   Difference of squares

D.   Trinomials

E.   Sum and difference of  cubes



  VI.  Rational expressions

       A.   Reducing

B.   Multiplication

C.   Division

D.   Addition

E.   Subtraction

F.   Simplifying complex fractions

G.   Solving rational equations

                                                                    

  VII. Radical expressions

       A.   Rational exponents

B.   Simplifying

C.   Multiplication and division

D.   Addition and subtraction

E.   Solving radical equations

F.   Performing operations on complex numbers



  VIII.     Quadratic equations

       A.   Solve quadratic equations by factoring

B.   Solve quadratic equations by completing the square

C.   Solve quadratic equations by quadratic formula

D.   Solve quadratic equations by graphing

E.   Solve quadratic equations in type

F.   Solve nonlinear inequalities



  IX.  Systems of equations

       A.   2 x 2 linear systems

B.   3 x 3 linear systems
