MAT-134

Contemporary Mathematics

Credits: 3

Prerequisite: College Placement Test or Mat 093 or written

permission of instructor

Revised Syllabi Fall 2002



Howard Valentine

Department Chair, Mathematics

valentinesalemcc.edu



Course Description:

This course is designed to enable students to develop an

appreciation of mathematics and an awareness of how it is used

today.  The course will investigate transformational geometry,

statistics and discrete mathematical models (graph theory).  In

addition, the instructor may choose from the following topics:

voting theory, fair division, apportionment, fractal geometry, and

real numbers as related to continuous mathematics.





Performance Objective 1:

     The student will perform rudimentary statistical analysis.



Enabling Objectives:

     A.   The student will describe the issues concerning data

collection.

     B.   Given a statistical sample, the student will summarize

the data using descriptive

          statistics.

     C.   The student will calculate some simple probabilities.

     D.   The student will interpret normal curve distributions

          and describe how such distributions can be used to make

          statistical inferences.





Performance Objective 2:

     The student will use transformational geometry.



Enabling Objectives:

     A.   Given a geometrical figure, the student will determine

if it has geometrical

          symmetry.

     B.   The student will demonstrate rigid motions involving two-

dimensional objects.

     C.   The student will demonstrate reflections involving two-

dimensional objects.

     D.   The student will demonstrate rotations involving two-

dimensional objects.

     E.   The student will demonstrate translations involving two-

dimensional objects.

     F.   The student will demonstrate glide reflections involving

two-dimensional objects.

     G.   The student will identify recurring patterns in two-

dimensional objects.



Performance Objective 3:

     The student will analyze a discrete mathematical model.



Enabling Objectives:

     A.   Given an Euler Circuit problem, the student will apply

          basic mathematical theory involving graphs, edges,

          vertices and their degrees, loops, paths, and

          connectedness to solve it.

     B.   Given a Hamiltonian Circuit problem, the student will

          determine an algorithm for finding a Hamiltonian circuit

          of minimum cost.

     C.   The student will apply trees, sets, and counting

          techniques to discrete mathematical models.

     D.   Given a Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), the student

          will explain the need for computationally efficient

          algorithms.

     E.   Given a minimum network problem, the student will solve

          it using various strategies such as subgraphs, circuits,

          connectedness, trees, edges, and vertices (graph

          theory).

     F.   The student will demonstrate the need for scheduling,

          describe some of the complexities in scheduling

          problems, and solve simple scheduling problems.

          (Optional)





Performance Objective 4: (Optional)

     Students will describe and demonstrate the problems of

finding a fair voting system.



Enabling Objectives:

     A.   Students will describe and use the Plurality Method of

voting.

     B.   Students will describe and use the Borda Count Method of

voting.

     C.   Students will describe and use the Plurality-with-

          Elimination Method of voting.

     D.   Students will describe and use Pairwise Comparisons.





Performance Objective 5:  (Optional)

     Students will demonstrate the procedures involved in various

systems of fair division.



Enabling Objectives:

     A.   Students will describe and use Divider-Chooser Method of

sharing.

     B.   Students will describe and use the Lone-Divider Method

of sharing.

     C.   Students will describe and use the Lone-Chooser Method

of sharing.

     D.   Students will describe and use the Last-Diminisher

Method of sharing.

     E.   Students will describe and use the Method of Sealed

Bids.

     F.   Students will describe and use the Method of Markers.





Performance Objective 6: (Optional)

     Students will demonstrate the mathematics of apportionment.



Enabling Objectives:

     A.   Students will describe and use Hamiltons Method.

     B.   Students will describe and use The Quota Rule.

     C.   Students will describe and use The Alabama Paradox.

     D.   Students will describe and use Jeffersons Method.

     E.   Students will describe and use Adams Method.

     F.   Students will describe and use Websters Method.





Performance Objective 7: (Optional)

     Students will demonstrate discrete models of continuous data.



Enabling Objectives:

     A.   The student will use mathematics to describe the

dynamics of population growth.

     B.   The student will describe and use the linear growth

model.

     C.   The student will describe and use the exponential growth

model.

     D.   The student will describe and use the logistic growth

model.





Performance Objective 8:  (Optional)

     Students will demonstrate manifestations of fractal geometry.



Enabling Objectives:

     A.   The student will describe and create the Koch Snowflake.

     B.   The student will describe and create the Sierpinski

Gasket.

     C.   The student will describe the Chaos Game.

     D.   The student will describe and create a subset of the

Mandelbrot Set.



Required Text:

     Tannenbaum, P. and R. Arnold.  Excursions in Modern

          Mathematic. (5th ed.). Upper Saddle Rive, NJ: Prentice

          Hall.  2001.



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:

     Homework and class participation (maximum) 75 points

     Quizzes (3 or more) 25 points each

     Exams (3 or more) 100 points each

     Final Exam (comprehensive) 200 points



     Course Grade:  (based on a percentage of total possible

points)



          A    93 - 100

          A-   90 - 92

          B   88 - 89

          B    83 - 87

          B-   80 - 82

          C   78 - 79

          C    73 - 77

          C-   70 - 72

          D   68 - 69

          D    60 - 67

          F    < 60

          FA   Failure due to lack of attendance

          W    Withdraw

          Note:     Withdrawing from the course MUST be completed

               through the Student Affairs Office.



Attendance Policy: Students are expected to attend all scheduled

classes.



Academic Honesty Policy:

Students found to have committed an act of academic dishonesty may

be subject to failure in this course, academic probation, and/or

suspension from the college. A breach of the Academic Integrity

and Conduct Rule occurs if a student a) knowingly represents the

work of others as his or her own (plagiarism) b) uses or obtains

unauthorized assistance in any academic work or c) gives

fraudulent assistance to another student. (This list is not

exhaustive.) See the Student Handbook for additional details.



Course Activities:

     Content will be delivered by means of lecture and group

discussion.  The students

     will have the opportunity to work collaboratively to explore

mathematical

     situations.



Course Outline:



     I.   Statistics

          A.   Collecting Data

          B.   Descriptive Statistics

          C.   Probability

          D.   Inferential Statistics



     II.  Transformational Geometry

          A.   Geometrical Symmetry

          B.   Rigid Motions

          C.   Reflections

          D.   Rotations

          E.   Translations

          F.   Glide Reflections

          G.   Patterns



     III. Discrete Mathematical Models (Graph Theory)

          A.   Euler Circuits

          B.   Hamiltonian Circuits

          C.   Trees, Sets, and Counting Techniques

          D.   Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)

          E.   Networks

          E.   Scheduling (Optional)



     IV.  Additional Topics (Optional)

          A.   Mathematics of Voting

          B.   Fair Division

          C.   Apportionment

          D.   Discrete Models of Continuous Data

          E.   Fractal Geometry
