            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College MAT 137 College Algebra



MAT 137 College Algebra: Credits: 2:2:3, Prerequisite: College Placement 
Test or Mat 136 or written permission of 

instructor. Co-requisite: None



Contact Karen Mattison (856) 351-2672, kmattisonsalemcc.edu



Course Description: This course is designed to enable students to become 
proficient in analyzing linear, quadratic, 

polynomial, rational, exponential, and logarithmic functions.  Students will 
also be able to solve both linear and nonlinear 

systems.  Students will investigate topics both analytically and 
graphically.  Methods of instruction include lecture, group 

discussion, and graphical analysis on both the graphing calculator and the 
computer.  The structure of the lab will be one 

of the following:  a challenging problem set that the students work on 
collaboratively, a graphing calculator investigation or 

a computer experiment where the students investigate mathematics in an 
applied mode.  Placement in the course is 

insured by a score of 25 or higher on the Intermediate Algebra Skills test 
administered by Student Services before the 

first day of class. Place in the College Curriculum: This course is required 
in many of the colleges programs and may 

be used as a mathematics or open elective.



Performance Objective I:  The student will be able to analyze general 
functions. 

Performance Objective II:  The student will be able to analyze linear 
functions. 

Performance Objective III:  The student will be able to analyze quadratic 
functions. 

Performance Objective IV:  The student will be able to analyze polynomial 
functions. 

Performance Objective V:  The student will be able to analyze rational 
functions. 

Performance Objective VI:  The student will be able to analyze exponential 
functions. 

Performance Objective VII:  The student will be able to analyze logarithmic 
functions. 

Performance Objective VIII (Optional): The student will be able to analyze 
systems of equations. 



Required Text: Larson, Hostetler,  Hodgkins, College Algebra:  Concepts  
Models, 5th Ed., Houghton  Mifflin, 2006. 

Materials or Supplies: Texas Instruments Graphing Calculator TI-83 series or 
TI-84 series 



General Education Requirements: The general education goals covered in MAT 
137 are critical thinking  problem 

solving, quantitative skills, and science  technology.  See student handbook 
for additional details. 

Course Activities: Content will be delivered by means of lecture, group 
discussion, and laboratory exercises including 

collaborative work as well as calculator and computer investigations.  

Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:  Refer to instructors syllabus 
addendum. 



Grading Scale: 

93  100  A, 90  92  A-, 88  89  B, 83  87  B, 80  82  B-, 78  79  C, 73  77  
C, 70  72  C-, 68  69  D, 

60  67  D, 59  below  F, Failure due to attendance  FA.



Course Content Outline:

I. Functions: A. Domain, B. Range, C. Sum, Difference, Product, and 
Quotient, D.Composition, E. Inverses. 

II. Linear Functions: A. Slope, B. Graphs, C. Equations, D. Parallel and 
perpendicular, E. Application 

III. Quadratic Functions: A. Standard form and vertex, B.Graphs, C. 
Applications 

IV. Polynomial Functions: A. Shapes of graphs, B. Zeros, C. End behavior

V. Rational Functions: A. Vertical asymptotes, B.Horizontal asymptotes, C. 
Zeros, D. Graphs 

VI. Exponential Functions: A. Domain and range, B. Asymptote, C. Graphs, D. 
Applications 

VII. Logarithmic Functions: A. Domain and range, B. Asymptote, C. Graphs, D. 
Applications 

VIII. Systems of Equations (optional): A. Linear systems, B. Nonlinear 
systems, C. Linear Programming 
