            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College MA 93 Course Syllabus



MA 93 Elementary Algebra: Course Code 4:0:4, Prerequisite MA 90 or college 
placement test 



Contact Karen Mattison (856) 351-2672, kmattisonsalemcc.edu



Course Description: This course is designed to enable students to become 
very proficient in the manipulative skills of 

traditional algebra.  Students will investigate algebra at the very basic 
level. The topics included in the course present the 

introduction of functions, linear equations and inequalities, properties of 
lines, systems of equations, exponents and 

polynomials, factoring, rational expressions, radical expressions, and 
quadratic equations.  Methods of instruction 

include lecture, group discussion, and graphical analysis on both the 
graphing calculator and computer.  Placement in 

the College Curriculum: This course is used to build Academic competencies 
of students who lack appropriate 

mathematical proficiencies required for entry into the college curriculum of 
their choice. 

Course Performance Objective 1: The students will analyze Real Numbers

Course Performance Objective 2:  The students will manipulate fractions, 
decimals, and algebraic expressions. 

Course Performance Objective 3:  The student will solve equations and 
inequalities. 

Course Performance Objective 4:  The student will be able to graph linear 
equations in two variables. 

Course Performance Objective 5:  The students will solve systems of linear 
equations. 

Course Performance Objective 6:  The student will manipulate polynomials.

Course Performance Objective 7:  The student will factor polynomials and 
solve quadratic equations 

Course Performance Objective 8:  The student will simplify rational 
expressions and solve rational equation. 

Course Performance Objective 9:  The student will work with real numbers and 
radicals. 

General Education Requirements: The general education goals covered in 
Elementary Algebra are critical thinking and 

problem solving, quantitative skills, and science and technology.  See 
Student Handbook for additional details. 

General Outcomes Assessment:  A college-wide outcomes assessment program has 
been put into place to enhance the 

quality and effectiveness of the curriculum and programs at Salem Community 
College. As part of this assessment 

program, the learning outcomes for this course will be assessed. Assessment 
methods may include tests, quizzes, 

papers, reports, projects and other instruments. Copies of all outcomes 
assessments are available in an electronic 

assessment bank maintained by the Institutional Research and Planning 
Office. 

Required Text: Wright, D. Franklin and Bill D. New, Introductory Algebra, 
5th Ed (2004), Hawkes Publishing. 

ISBN: 0-918091-62-4

Material or Supplies: Texas Instruments Graphing Calculator TI-83 series.

Course Activities: Content will be delivered by means of lecture and group 
discussion including collaborative work as 

well as calculator and computer investigations.  The student will have the 
opportunity to explore mathematics with weekly 

supplemental instruction to reinforce the content he/she is learning in 
class. 

Course Content Outline:

I. Integers and Real Numbers: A. The Real Number and Absolute Value, B. 
Addition with integers, C. Subtraction with 

integers, D. Multiplication and division with integers, E. Exponents, Prime 
Numbers, and orders of operations, F. 

Properties of real numbers

II. Fractions, Decimals, and Algebraic Expressions: A. Multiplying and 
dividing fractions, B. Adding and subtracting 

fractions, C. Decimal Numbers and fractions, D. Changing value, E. 
Simplifying and evaluating algebraic expressions, F. 

Translating English phrases and algebraic expressions

III. Solving Equations and Inequalities: A. Solving linear equations: (x  b  
c and ax  c), B. Solving linear equations: 

(ax b  c), C. Applications, 1. Number problems and consecutive integers, 2. 
Percent problems, D. Working with 

formulas

IV. Graphing Linear Equations in Two Variables: A. The Cartesian Coordinate 
System, B. Graphing linear equations in 

two variables, C. The Slope- Intercept Form: (y  mx  b)

V. Systems of Linear Equations: A. Systems of equations, 1. Solutions by 
graphing, 2. Solutions by substitution, 3. 

Solutions by addition

VI. Exponents and Polynomials: A. Exponents, B. Identifying and evaluating 
polynomials, C. Adding and subtracting 

polynomials, D. Multiplying polynomials, E. Special products of binomials

VII. Factoring Polynomials and Solving Quadratic Equations: A. Greatest 
Common Factor, B. Factoring by grouping, 

C. Factoring trinomials: leading coefficient of one, 1. More on factoring, 
2. Factoring special products, D. Solving 

quadratic equations by factoring, E. Applications of quadratic equations, F. 
Additional factoring review 

VIII. Rational Expressions: A. Reducing rational expressions, B. 
Multiplication and division with rational expressions, C. 

Addition and subtraction with rational expressions. D. Solving equations 
involving rational expressions 

IX. Real Numbers and Radicals:  A. Real numbers and radicals, B. Addition, 
subtraction and multiplication with radicals, 

C. Rationalizing denominators, D. Rational exponents







                  
