            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College MA 95 Course Syllabus



MA 95 Intermediate Algebra: Course Code: 2:4:4, Prerequisite: MA 93 
placement on college placement test or written 

permission of instructor.



Contact Karen Mattison (856) 351-2672, kmattisonsalemcc.edu



Course Description: This course provides a smooth transition from basic 
algebra skills developed in Elementary Algebra 

to the more abstract skills and reasoning abilities necessary to be 
successful in College Algebra.  Students will 

investigate algebra both analytically and graphically.  Major topics include 
an in-depth presentation of functions, linear 

equations and inequalities, properties of lines, systems of equations, 
exponents and polynomials, factoring, rational 

expressions, radical expressions, and quadratic equations.  Methods of 
instruction include lecture, group discussion, 

and graphical analysis on both the graphing calculator and computer.  The 
weekly labs focus on the topics of the week 

and will consist of one of the following:  a challenging problem set that 
the students work on collaboratively, a graphing 

calculator investigation or a computer experiment where the students 
investigate mathematics in an applied mode. 

Placement in the College Curriculum:This course is designed to build 
algebraic skills of students to enable them to be 

successful in College Algebra.

Course Performance Objective 1:  The students will analyze functions.

Course Performance Objective 2:  The students will solve linear equations 
and inequalities. 

Course Performance Objective 3:  The student will find and analyze equations 
of lines. 

Course Performance Objective 4:  The student will manipulate polynomials.

Course Performance Objective 5:  The student will completely factor 
polynomials. 

Course Performance Objective 6:  The student will simplify rational 
expressions and solve rational equations. 

Course Performance Objective 7:  The student will simplify radical 
expressions and solve radical equations. 

Course Performance Objective 8:  The student will solve quadratic equations.

Course Performance Objective 9:  The student will solve systems of linear 
equations. 

Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: The instructor will evaluate 
the students in various ways. Exams, 

quizzes, papers, oral presentations, and class participation may be used to 
evaluate students. 

General Education Requirements: The general education goals covered in 
Intermediate Algebra are critical thinking and 

problem solving, quantitative skills, and science and technology. See 
Student Handbook for additional details. 

General Outcome Assessment: A college-wide outcomes assessment program has 
been put into place to enhance the 

quality and effectiveness of the curriculum and programs at Salem Community 
College. As part of this assessment 

program, the learning outcomes for this course will be assessed. Assessment 
methods may include tests, quizzes, 

papers, reports, projects and other instruments. Copies of all outcomes 
assessments are available in an electronic 

assessment bank maintained by the Institutional Research and Planning 
Office. 

Course Activities: Content will be delivered by means of lecture, group 
discussion, and laboratory exercises including 

collaborative work as well as calculator and computer

Required Text:  Wright, D. Franklin and Bill D. New, Intermediate Algebra, 
4th ed., (2004) Hawkes Publishing. 

ISBN 0-918091-80-2

Material or Supplies:Texas Instruments Graphing Calculator TI-83.

Course Content Outline:

I.Functions:  A. Notation, B. Domain, C. Range

II.Linear Equations and Inequalities: A. Solve linear equations, B. Solve 
linear inequalities, C. Solve compound 

inequalities, D. Solve absolute value equations, E. Solve absolute value 
inequalities 

III.Properties of Lines: A. Slope, B. Find equation satisfying given 
conditions, C. Vertical and horizontal lines, D. 

Parallel and perpendicular lines

IV.Polynomials: A. Monomial arithmetic, B. Addition, C. Subtraction, D. 
Multiplication, E. Long Division, F. 

Synthetic division

V.Factoring: A. Greatest common factor, B. Grouping, C. Difference of 
squares, D. Trinomials, E. Sum and 

difference cubes

VI.Rational expressions: A. Reducing, B. Multiplication, C. Division, D. 
Addition, E. Subtraction, F. Simplifying 

complex fractions, G. Solving rational equations

VII.Radical expressions:  A. Rational exponents, B. Simplifying, C. 
Multiplication and division, D. Addition and 

subtraction, E. Solving radical equations, F. Performing operations on 
complex numbers 

VIII.Quadratic equations: A. Solve quadratic equations by factoring, B. 
Solve quadratic equations by completing the 

square, C. Solve quadratic equations by quadratic formula, D. Solve 
quadratic equations by graphing, E. Solve 

quadratic equations in type, F. Solve nonlinear inequalities

IX.Systems of equations: A. 2 x 2 linear systems, B. 3 x 3 linear systems
