Mat 231

CALCULUS I

Credits: 4

Prerequisite:  Mat 137 and 145,  Mat 151, placement test, or

instructors consent.

Revised Syllabi Spring 2002



Howard Valentine

Department Chair, Mathematics

valentinesalemcc.edu



Course Description:      This course is designed for

               students who need a calculus background for

               their major area of study, future career, or

               as preparation for higher levels of

               mathematics.  Topics include limits

               continuity derivatives of algebraic,

               trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic

               functions curve sketching related

               rates applied max/min problems Rolles

               Theorem Mean Value Theorem and integration.





Performance Objective 1:

     The student will evaluate limits and determine

continuity.



Enabling Objectives:

     1.   The student will find a limit of a function

          graphically, numerically and algebraically.

     2.   The student will evaluate a one-sided limit.

     3.   The student will determine continuity of a function at

          a point and on an interval.

     4.   The student will determine an infinite limit for a

function, if it exists.



Performance Objective 2:

     The student will find derivatives of functions and

     analyze applications using derivatives.



Enabling Objectives:

     1.    The student will find the slope of a tangent line

          using the definition of derivative.

     2.   The student will apply the basic rules for finding

          the derivative of a function.

     3.   The student will analyze a rate of change

application using derivatives.

     4.   The student will find higher order derivatives of

a function.

     5.   The student will use implicit differentiation to find a

          derivative of a function.

     6.   The student will find the derivative of an inverse

          function.

     7.   The student will apply derivative theory to solve a

          related rate application problem.

     8.   The student will use Newtons Method to

          approximate the real zeros of a function.





Performance Objective 3:

     The student will use the derivative to analyze graphs

     of functions in application problems.



Enabling Objectives:

     1.   The student will use the derivative to find extrema on

          an interval.

2.   The student will apply Rolles Theorem.

3.   The student will apply the Mean Value Theorem.

4.   The student will use the derivative to determine where

a function is increasing and decreasing and to identify all

relative extrema.

5.   The student will apply the First Derivative Test.

6.   The student will use the second derivative to analyze

concavity of a function and to locate all inflection points.

7.   The student will apply the Second Derivative Test.

8.   The student will evaluate a limit at infinity.

9.   The student will apply information from using the

derivative in sketching a graph of a function.

10.  The student will solve an optimization problem.

11.  The student will analyze a differential problem.



Performance Objective 4:

     The student will find an indefinite and definite

integral.



Enabling Objectives:

     1.   The student will find an indefinite integral as an

          antiderivative.

2.   The student will find an approximation for area under a

curve and the exact area under a curve using the limit.

3.   The student will summarize the idea of a Riemann Sum

and the definition

             i.   of the definite integral.

     4.   The student will apply the Fundamental Theorem of

          Calculus to find a definite integral.

5.   The student will use substitution to find an integral.

6.   The student will approximate a definite integral using

the Trapezoidal Rule and Simpsons Rule.

7.   The student will find derivatives and integrals

involving the natural logarithmic function.

8.   The student will find derivatives and integrals

involving the inverse trigonometric functions.

9.   The student will find derivatives and integrals

involving the hyperbolic functions.

10.  The student will solve a simple growth and decay.

     

                                                            



Required Text: Hostetler, Larson.  Calculus:  Early

               Transcendental Functions.  New York:

               Houghton Mifflin Publishing, 2nd ed.



Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:



     Assignments:

          Homework will be assigned at the end of each class

     period, and questions

          will be answered the following class.  Homework

should be completed

          neatly, showing all work.  These assignments

     should be kept in some

          organized manner for further reference.  A valid

     attempt on every problem

          assigned is expected, not a correct answer on

     every problem assigned.

          The quizzes and exams will follow the same pattern

     as the homework.



     Quizzes and Exams:

          Quizzes (5 or more) 10 points each

          Exams (3 or more) 100 points each

          Final Exam (comprehensive) 200 points



     Course Grade: (based on a percentage of total possible

points)

          A    93 - 100

          A-   90 - 92

          B   88 - 89

          B    83 - 87

          B-   80 - 82

          C   78 - 79

          C    73 - 77

          C-   70 - 72

          D   68 - 69

          D    60 - 67

          F     59



Attendance:  Students are expected to attend all scheduled

classes.



Academic Honesty Policy:

     Students found to have committed an act of academic

dishonesty may be subject

     to failure in this course, academic probation, and/or

suspension from the college.

     See the Student Handbook for additional details.





Course Content Outline:

I.    Limits and Their Properties

     A.   Evaluating Limits Graphically, Numerically, and

Analytically

     B.   One Sided Limits

     C.   Continuity

     D.   Infinite Limits

II.  Differentiation

     A.   Tangent Lines

     B.   Rules for Differentiation

     C.   Rates of Change

     D.   Higher Order Derivatives

     E.   The Chain Rule

     F.   Implicit Differentiation

     G.   Derivatives of Inverse Functions

     H.   Related Rates

     I.   Newtons Method

III. Applications of Differentiation

     A.   Extrema on an Interval

     B.   Rolles Theorem

     C.   Mean Value Theorem

    D.   Increasing/Decreasing Functions

     E.   First Derivative Test

     F.   Concavity

     G.   Second Derivative Test

     H.   Limits at Infinity

     I.   Curve Sketching

     J.   Optimization Problems

     K.   Differentials

IV.  Integration

     A.   Indefinite Integration

     B.   Area

     C.   Riemann Sums and the Definite Integral

     D.   Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

     E.   Integration by Substitution

     F.   Numerical Integration

     G.   Natural Logarithm Function and Integration

     H.   Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Integration

     I.   Hyperbolic Functions

     J.   Growth and Decay





Course Activities:

     Students will learn from lectures during which new

     material will be delivered, small group discussions,

     individual explorations, practice work, and discussion

     of assigned homework problems.  Students will have the

     opportunity to investigate calculus using Mathematica

     software.
