            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College Course Syllabus



Mathematics 205

Industrial Statistics

Credits:  3.0 Lecture 0 Laboratory,  Total 3.0

Pre-Requisites:  MAT105

New Course:  Fall 2003



Howard Valentine

Department Chair, Mathematics

valentinesalemcc.edu

                                   



                                   

Course Description:    This course teaches basic statistical methods

                  with an emphasis on industrial applications.  The

                  principles of both descriptive of both descriptive

                  and inferential statistics are taught, with topics

                  including the normal distribution, hypothesis

                  testing, correlation and regression, analysis of

                  variance, and statistical process control.  Basic

                  mathematics is required and Excel software

                  familiarity is highly recommended.





Place in College Curriculum:     A three-credit course required for

                  Process Technology and an

                         elective for other areas.

Course Content:



I.   Introduction

     A.   Overview of Statistics

B.   Nature of Data

C.   Use of Excel in Statistics



II.  Data Analysis

     A.   Summarizing Data

B.   Measures of Central Tendency

C.   Measures of Variation

D.   Measures of Position



III. Probability Fundamentals



IV.  Probability distributions

     A.   Random Variables

B.   Binomial Experiments

C.   Central Tendency, Variance

D.   Poisson Distribution



V.   Normal Probability Distributions

     A.   Standard Normal Distribution

B.   Nonstandard Normal Distribution

C.   Central Limit Theorem



VI.  Estimates and Sample Sizes

     A.   Estimating Population Mean

         1.   Large Samples

2.   Small Samples

     B.   Estimating Population Proportion

C.   Estimating Population Variance



VII. Hypothesis Testing

     A.   Fundamentals

B.   Testing a Claim about a Mean

         1.   Large Samples

2.   Small Samples

     C.   Testing a claim about a Proportion

D.   Testing a Claim about a Standard Deviation or Variance



VIII.     Dependent Samples:  Inferences about Two Means



IX.  Correlation and Regression

     A.   Correlation

B.   Regression

                                                                       

X.   Cntingency Tables



XI.  Analysis of Variance

     A.   One-Way

B.   Two-Way



XII. Statistical Process Control

     A.   Overview

B.   Control Charts for Variation and Mean

C.   Control Charts for Attributes

                                                                       

Course Performance Objective 1:  The student will be able to define and

comprehend the nature of statistical data.



Enabling Objectives:  The student will

1.   Recognize key terms used in the field.

2.   Identify different types of data, measurement levels, and sampling

methodology.

3.   Recognize common uses and misuses of statistical data.





Course Performance Objective 2:  The student will be able to convey

statistics in a descriptive sense.



Enabling Objectives:  The student will

1.   Construct various visual data displays.

2.   Calculate and interpret measures of central tendency and

dispersion.





Course Performance Objective 3:  The student will understand the basics

of probability theory and its relationship to inference.





Course Performance Objective 4:  The student will be able to recognize

and define discrete and continuous random variables and probability

distributions.



Enabling Objectives:  The student will use the above concepts to

1.   Calculate probabilities for binomial experiments.

2.   Calculate the mean, variance, and standard deviation for a

binomial distribution.

3.   Define and comprehend calculations using the Poisson distribution.





Course Performance Objective 5:  The student will be able to

incorporate the concept of a normal probability distribution.



Enabling Objectives:  The student will

1.   Compute standard values to determine probabilities.

2.   Compute scores that correspond to given probabilities.

3.   Apply the Central Limit Theorem to statistical problems.

4.   Use the normal distribution to estimate probabilities in a

binomial experiment.

                                                                       

Course Performance Objective 6:  The will apply the basics of

statistical inference



Enabling Objectives:  The student will be able to

1.   Estimate population parameters from sample statistics.

2.   Define and compute confidence intervals and margins of error for

both large and small samples.

3.   Select the appropriate distribution for various samples.

4.   Estimate a population proportion from sample statistics.

5.   Recognize the uses for and compute probabilities from the chi-

square distribution.





Course Performance Objective 7:  The student will recognize the

relevance of hypothesis testing in statistical processes.



Enabling Objectives:  The student will be able to

1.   Construct basic hypothesis tests.

2.   Recognize the two types of errors which can occur during

hypothesis testing.

3.   Conduct hypothesis testing for large samples, small samples,

proportions, and standard deviations (or variances).





Course Performance Objective 8:  The student will test hypotheses.



Enabling Objectives:  The student will be able to

1.   Test hypotheses by means of paired or dependent samples.

2.   Test hypotheses made about two population variances or standard

deviations.





Course Performance Objective 9:  The student will recognize

relationships between two variables (correlation).



Enabling Objectives:  The student will be able to

1.   Compute the strength of the relationships.

2.   Recognize common errors involving correlation.

3.   Construct hypothesis tests for linear correlation.





Course Performance Objective 10:  The student will recognize linear

relationships through the computerized construction of a regression

equation and scatter diagram.





Course Performance Objective 11:  The student will recognize multiple

regression equations through the computerized construction of a

multiple regression equation.



                                                                       

Course Performance Objective 12:  The student will recognize and

construct contingency tables.



Enabling Objectives:  The student will be able to

1.   Use the chi-square test to determine independence of variables.

2.   Use the chi-square test to determine a test of homogeneity of data

samples from different populations.





Course Performance Objective 13:  The student will be able to recognize

uses for one- and two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).





Course Performance Objective 14:  The student will substantiate the

importance of quality control and monitoring processes in the area of

statistical process control.



Enabling Objectives:  The student will be able to

1.   Construct and interpret run charts and control charts for both

     process variation and process mean.

2.   Construct and interpret control charts for attributes.

                                                                       

                                                                       

Course Activities:



MAT205 is primarily a lecture/discussion class.





Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation:



There is a homework assignment following each chapter which is due the

following week.

Homework assignments count for 20 of the final grade.

There are four (4) in-class exams.  These count for 50 of the final

grade.

There is an in-class final exam which counts for 30 of the final

grade.



The final grade is determined by adding up the total points achieved by

each student and dividing by the total number of possible points.  The

Salem Community College grading system is then used:



Final Grade Calculation   Grade Points

    93 - 100  A            4

    90 -  92  A-         3.7

    88 - 89  B         3.3

    83 - 87  B             3

    80 - 82  B-         2.7

    78 - 79  C         2.3

    73 -  77  C            2

    70 -  72  C-         1.7

    68 - 69  D         1.3

    60 - 67  D             1

    59 - below  F           0

          59 - below  FA                0

          (and greater than 30 absences)







Text:     Triola, M.,  Elementary Statistics, 8th ed., 2001, Addison

Wesley Longman, Inc.





                                   
