            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community MAT153 College Course Syllabus

MAT153 Precalculus 4:0:4, Prerequisite: Assessment Test or MAT 136 or MA 95 or written permission of 
instructor . Co-requisite: None

Contact: Karen Mattison (876) 351-2672 kmattison@salemcc.edu 

Course Description: This course prepares students for the study of Calculus.  This course will review 
algebraic techniques and enable students to become proficient in analyzing linear, quadratic, polynomial, 
rational, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions.  Students are required to have a Texas 
Instruments TI-83, TI-83 Plus, or TI-84 plus calculator.
Place in the College Curriculum: This course is required in many of the college?s programs 
and may be used as a 4 credit mathematics or open elective.
Course Content Outline: I. Review of Algebraic Topics II. Functions (General)A. Domain & Range  B. 
Sum, Difference, Product, and Quotient C.  Composition D. Inverses III. Linear Functions A. Slope B. 
Graphs C. Equations D. Parallel and perpendicular E. Application IV.Quadratic Functions A. Standard 
form and vertex B.Graphs C. ApplicationsD. V.Polynomial Functions A. Shapes of graphs B. Zeros C. 
End behavior VI. Rational Functions A. Vertical B. symptotes C. Horizontal asymptotes D. Zeros E. 
Graphs  VII. Exponential Functions A.Domain and range B. Asymptote C. Graphs D. Applications VIII. 
Logarithmic Functions A. Domain and range B.  Asymptote C. Graphs D. Applications
Performance Objective I:       The student will be able to analyze general functions.
Performance Objective II:	The student will be able to analyze linear functions.
Performance Objective III:	The student will be able to analyze quadratic functions.
Performance Objective IV:	The student will be able to analyze polynomial functions.
Performance Objective V:	The student will be able to analyze rational functions.
Performance Objective VI:	The student will be able to analyze exponential functions.
Performance Objective VII:	The student will be able to analyze logarithmic functions.
Performance Objective VIII:	The student will be able to analyze trigonometric functions.
Performance Objective IX:	The student will be able to graph trigonometric functions.
Performance Objective X:	The student will be able to prove trigonometric identities
Performance Objective XI:	The student will be able to solve trigonometric equations.
Performance Objective XII:	The student will be able to analyze inverse trigonometric 
functions.
Performance Objective XIII:	The student will be able to solve a triangle problem
General Education Outcomes: Critical Thinking & Problem Solving:  students will use critical thinking 
and problem solving skills.
General Education Outcomes Assessment:  A college-wide assessment program has been put into 
place to enhance the quality and effectiveness of the curriculum and programs at Salem Community 
College.  As part of this assessment program the learning objectives for this course will be assessed.  
Assessment methods may include tests, quizzes, papers, reports and other instruments.  All information 
will be held with Institutional Research and Planning.
Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: Self-evaluation, Tests and Quizzes, Auto-tutorial 
interactive learning, Critical thinking skills scenarios
Grading System:A=93-100	A- = 90-92 B+ = 88-89 B= 83-87 B- = 80-82 C+ =  78-79 C= 73-77 C- = 
70-72 D+ = 68-69 D	= 60-67 F = Below 60	 F/A= The F/A grade is given for failing the course and 
missing 30 percent or more of the course.

Required Text(s): Larson, Hostetler. Precalculus: A Concise Course. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2007.  

