            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Salem Community College MAT 233 Course Syllabus



MAT 233 Calculus: Course Credits: 4:0:4, Prerequisite:  MAT 232 or written 
permission or instructor. Co-requisite:  None. 

Contact Karen Mattison (856) 351-2672, kmattisonsalemcc.edu

Course Description: This course is designed for students who need a calculus 
background for their major area of study, 

future career, or as preparation for higher levels of mathematics.  Topics 
include: Vector treatment of three-dimensional 

geometry, partial derivatives of functions of two or more variables, polar 
coordinate, parametric equations, multiple 

integrals, elementary differential equations and vector fields. Place in the 
College Curriculum:  This course is required in 

some of the transfer degree programs at Salem Community College.  The course 
may be used as a mathematics elective. 

Performance Objective 1: The student will recognize and use parametric 
equations. Enabling Objectives: 1. The student 

will sketch the graph of a curve given by a set of parametric equations. 2. 
The student will eliminate the parameter in a set 

of parametric equations. 3. The student will represent a curve as a set of 
parametric equations. 4. The student will 

calculate the slope of a tangent line to a curve given by a set of 
parametric equations. 5. The student will calculate the arc 

length of a curve given by a set of parametric equations. 6. The student 
will calculate the area of a surface of revolution 

(parametric form).

Performance Objective 2: The student will graph and find areas enclosed by 
Polar curves. Enabling Objectives: 1.The 

student will rewrite rectangular equations in polar form and vice versa. 2. 
The student will sketch the graph of an equation 

given in polar form. 3. The student will calculate the slope of a tangent 
line to a polar graph. 4. The student will calculate 

the area of a region bounded by a polar graph. 5. The student will calculate 
the points of intersection of two polar graphs. 

6. The student will calculate the arc length of a polar graph. 7 The student 
will calculate the area of a surface of revolution 

(polar form).

Performance Objective 3: The student will evaluate and demonstrate vectors 
and analytic geometry methods in 3-space. 

Enabling Objectives: 1. The student will write the component form of a 
vector. 2. The student will perform vector 

operations and interpret the result geometrically. 3. The student will write 
a vector as a linear combination of standard unit 

vectors. 4. The student will solve problem involving force or velocity using 
vectors. 5. The student will describe the three- 

dimensional rectangular coordinate system. 6. The student will analyze 
vectors in space. 7. The student will solve real-life 

problems using three-dimensional vectors.

Performance Objective 4: The student will find partial derivatives of 
multi-variable functions. Enabling Objectives:1.The 

student will determine and use a partial derivative of a function of two 
variables. 2. The student will determine and use a 

partial derivative of a function of three variables. 3. The student will 
determine higher order partial derivative of a function 

of two or three variables. 

Performance Objective 5: The student will integrate functions of one and of 
several variables. Enabling Objectives: 

1.The student will evaluate an iterated integral. 2. The student will 
represent the volume of a solid region using a double 

integral. 3. The student will demonstrate the properties of double 
integrals. 4. The student will evaluate a double integral 

as an iterated integral. 5. The student will write and evaluate double 
integrals in polar coordinates. 6. The student will 

calculate the area of a surface using a double integral. 7. The student will 
calculate the volume of a solid region using a 

triple integral.

Performance Objective 6: The student will recognize and solve differential 
equations and vector fields. Enabling 

Objectives: 1.The student will solve a simple differential equation using 
separation of variables. 2. The student will use 

exponential functions to model growth and decay in applied problems. 3. The 
student will solve a first-order linear 

differential equation. 4. The student will explain the concept of a vector 
field. 5. The student will decide whether a vector 

field is conservative. 6. The student will determine the curl of a vector 
field. 7. The student will determine the divergence of 

a vector field. 8. The student will demonstrate the concept of a piecewise 
smooth curve. 9. The student will write and 

evaluate a line integral. 10. The student will write and evaluate a line 
integral of a vector field. 11. The student will write 

and evaluate a line integral in differential form.

General Education Requirements: The general education goals covered in 
Calculus 3 are critical thinking  problem 

solving, quantitative skills, and science  technology.  See student handbook 
for additional details. 

Required Text: Hostetler, Larson.  Calculus:  Early Transcendental 
Functions.  New York:  Houghton Mifflin Publishing, 

                          3rd ed. 2003

Required Materials: TI-83 Plus Graphing Calculator.   Additional Costs: None

Course Activities:  Students will learn from lectures during which new 
material will be delivered, small group discussions, 

individual explorations, practice work, and discussion of assigned homework 
problems.  Students will have the opportunity 

to investigate calculus using some computer software.

Course Requirements and Means of Evaluation: Students will be evaluated by 
several math activities, several tests, 

several quizzes, and a final exam. Proper assessment tools will be used to 
assess the students learning.  See addendum 

for specific details

Course Content Outline:  I. Review of differentiation and Integration  II. 
Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates: A. 

Parametric Equations, B. Arc Length, C. Polar Coordinates D. Area  III. 
Vectors: A. Vectors in 2- and 3-space, B. Analytic 

Geometry in 3-space  IV. Functions of Several Variables: A. Functions of Two 
or more variables, B. Partial Derivatives, C. 

Extremes for Functions of two variables  V. Multiple Integrals  VI. 
Differential Equations and Vector Fields. 
