            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

UNION COUNTY COLLEGE
COURSE SYLLABUS

COURSE NUMBER & NAME:	CIS 112 - Mobile Computing

LECTURE/LAB HOURS	2 Lecture Hours/2 Laboratory Hours

CREDITS	3

PREREQUISITES:	None

COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course provides the beginning programmer with a strong foundation necessary to build mobile applications 
for Android devices. Assuming little or no prior programming experience, this course introduces key 
programming concepts, including variables, decision making, lists, and arrays, and gives the confidence and 
technical skills to create fully-functional Android apps.

COURSE LEARNING OUTCOMES: 
Upon successful completion of this course the student should be able to:
1.	Build simple mobile applications for Android devices
2.	Implement icons and themes in an application
3.	Create control structures in an application
4.	Use lists and arrays in an application
5.	Implement audio, graphics and animation in an application

STUDENT RESOURCES:
Corrine Hoisington, Android Boot Camp for Developers using Java, Comprehensive: A Beginner's Guide to 
Creating Your First Android Apps, Course Technology, Cengage Learning 2013, ISBN: 9781133597209
Flash drive. It is important that you save all your work until your final grade has been received.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
*	The successful completion of a tests and final exam. 
*	The completion of all in-class assignments and projects. 
*	The completion of all assigned readings and homework.
*	Attendance and class participation. Students are required to attend all classes. See the College 
Attendance Policy discussed in the UCC Catalog. 

An essential element of this course includes information literacy. 'Information Literacy' is the evaluation and 
assessment of integrated information. Students will be able to locate, discern, and effectively use information to 
solve issues and/or problems.

EVALUATION METHODS:

      Tests				40%
      Assignments			40%
      Final exam			20%
Grading:
	A	90 or above
C	70-76
	B+	87-89
D+	67-69
	B	80-86
D	60-66
	C+	77-79
F	below 60

NOTE:
The instructor reserves the right to modify the course requirements, assignments, grading procedures and other related 
policies as circumstances may dictate.

****STUDENTS WITH PHYSICAL LEARNING DISABILITIES****

Any student with special needs that will affect performance in this class should feel free to make an 
appointment to talk with the instructor during office hours (or by appointment) or contact the disabilities 
counselor in the Counseling office on the Cranford Campus.

 
CLASS SCHEDULE:
Time
Topic
Assignments/Readings/Activities
Week 1
Introduction, syllabus, books, 
storage media, course expectations 
labs
Reading: Chapter 1
Written Assn: What is information systems, Case 
Study 1
Week 2
Installing the Android Eclipse 
SDK
Voilla! Meet the Android
Reading:Continue with Chapter 1
Written Assn: Employment within Information 
Systems
Week 3
Simplify! The Android User 
Interface
Research Paper: Explanation
Reading: Chapter 2
Written Assn: Review questions, Case Study.
Week 4
Engage! Android User Input, 
Variables, and Operations
Test 1: Material covered in previous classes
Reading: Corresponding chapter 3
Written Assn 
Week 5
Explore! Icons and Decision-
Making Controls
Reading  chapter 4and Written Assn Review 
Questions, Case Study
Week 6
Investigate! Android Lists, Arrays, 
and Web Browsers
Reading: Corresponding chapter 6
Written Assn Review Questions, Case Study
Week 7
Jam! Implementing Audio in 
Android Apps
Test 2: Material covered in previous classes
Readings and written assn. Corresponding 
chapter, Review Questions, Case Study
Week 8
Reveal! Displaying Pictures in a 
Gallery
Reading: Corresponding chapter 7
Written Assn Review Questions, Case Study
Week 9
Design! Using a DatePicker on a 
Tablet
Research Paper: Outline due
Reading: Corresponding chapter 8
Written Assn Review Questions, Case Study
Week 10
Customize! Navigating with Tabs 
on a Tablet App
Test 3 - Material covered in previous chapters
Reading: Corresponding chapter 9
Written Assn Review Questions, Case Study
Week 11
Move! Creating Animation and 
Graphics
Reading: Corresponding chapter 10
Written Assn: Review Questions, Case Study
Week 12
Discover! Incorporating Google 
Maps
Reading: Corresponding chapter 11
Written Assn Review Questions, Case Study
Week 13
Finale! Publishing your Android 
App
Reading: Corresponding chapter 12
Written Assn Review Questions, Case Study
Week 14
Review
Test 4 - Material covered in previous
Week 15

Final Examination










































 
CLASS POLICIES:
1.	Assignments are due by the date posted on the Web calendar. All assignments must be submitted in 
order to pass the course. Be sure to keep up with the assignments.
2.	If you are repeating this course, you must re-create all assignments. Be sure to create new files. Work 
submitted from a previous semester will not be accepted.
3.	Late work will be accepted; however, eleven points will be deducted for each day the assignment is late. 
No work will be accepted more than three calendar days after the due date. During the last full week of 
class, no work will be accepted late. Be sure to check the calendar!
4.	All tests must be taken. Each test may be taken only one time; so be sure you are prepared to take the 
test. While taking each test, you must disable any and all pop-up blockers that are enabled. You are on 
the honor system - no books, notes, or any type of assistance is permitted while taking tests. You may 
take the test at any time the test is available up to the closing date of the test. Tests cannot be made up. A 
grade of zero will be given for any test. In order to receive a passing grade, all tests, research paper, and 
final exam must be taken.
5.	To appeal a grade you must send a mail message to the instructor through ANGEL within five days of 
the posted grade. Overdue appeals will not be considered.
6.	It is important for you to log on to the class site a few times a week. Be sure to spend a minimum of 
eight hours a week completing the work for this class.
7.	Any acts of classroom disruption (including that of online courses) that go beyond the normal rights of 
students to question and discuss with instructors the educational process relative to subject content will 
not be tolerated, in accordance with the Academic Code of Conduct described in the Student Handbook. 
See the Student Handbook for the policy on 'Academic Integrity.' I strongly support the policy 
regarding academic behavior and disruptive behavior.

COURSE POLICIES
Preparing for Examinations
Complete the assignments and read the chapters. Most of the questions are taken directly from the reading 
material. Be sure to check the Key Terms and Review Questions at the end of each chapter. Use the student 
online companion and take advantage of the 'Self-Assessment Test' sections.

Appeals Policy
To appeal a grade, send an email to your instructor's email address within two weeks of the grade having been 
received. Overdue appeals will not be considered.

Incomplete Policy
Students will not be given an incomplete grade in the course without sound reason and documented evidence as 
described in the Student Handbook. In any case, for a student to receive an incomplete, he or she must be 
passing and must have completed a significant portion of the course.

Cheating Policy
Students are expected to uphold the school's standard of conduct relating to academic honesty. Students assume 
full responsibility for the content and integrity of the academic work they submit. The guiding principle of 
academic integrity shall be that a student's submitted work, examinations, tests, assignments, papers, and 
projects must be that of the student's own work. Students shall be guilty of violating the honor code if they:

1.	Represent the work of others as their own.
2.	Use or obtain unauthorized assistance in any academic work, including copying disks.
3.	Give unauthorized assistance to other students
4.	Modify, without instructor approval, an exam, paper, record, or report for the purpose of obtaining 
additional credit.
5.	Misrepresent the content of submitted work.

The penalty for violating the honor code is severe. Any student violating the honor code is subject to receive a 
failing grade for the course and may be subject to disciplinary action as described in the Student Handbook. If a 
student is unclear about whether a particular situation may constitute an honor code violation, the student 
should meet with the instructor to discuss the situation.

For this class, it is permissible to assist classmates in general discussions of computing techniques. General 
advice and interaction are encouraged. Each person, however, must develop his or her own solutions to the 
assigned homework and lab exercises. Except when assignments are given as group assignments, students may 
not 'work together' on graded assignments. Such collaboration constitutes cheating, unless it is a grouped 
assignment. A student may not use or copy (by any means) another's work (or portions of it) and represent it as 
his/her own. If you need help on an assignment, contact your instructor, not other classmates.

HOMEWORK AND LABORATORY POLICY:
Although the homework and laboratory assignments comprise 30 percent of the final grade, a student can 
receive a final grade no greater than a D if all assignments are not submitted. Homework and laboratory 
assignments receiving less than a 50 percent (F) score are considered not submitted.

No assignments will be accepted more than three days after the due date. Plan to spend approximately eight to 
twelve hours each week on reading, homework, and laboratory assignments.

Make sure your name, course and section, and assignment (Chapter 1) appear on the first page of a file. Put 
your name and the date in the upper right corner of a page.

DISABILITIES POLICY
Any student with special needs that will affect performance in this class should feel free to make an 
appointment to talk with me during office hours (or by appointment) or contact the disabilities counselor in the 
Counseling office on the Cranford Campus at 908-709-7164.

SUGGESTED TEACHING METHODOLOGIES:
a.	Lecture, group discussion, presentations, multimedia/technology, projects, experiments, 
demonstrations, etc.
b.	Indication of the percentages or emphasis given to teaching methodologies used will assist faculty 
members in course preparation and implementation.
      
CORRELATION OF PROGRAM OUTCOMES, COURSE OUTCOMES, AND ASSESSMENT
      
Program Outcomes
Course Learning Outcomes
Assessment of Outcomes
Use software methods and 
algorithmic thinking to 
design technological 
solutions for a variety of 
different fields.
Design, implement, test, 
and evaluate complete, 
logical programs with 
documentation that meet 
defined specifications.

Build simple mobile applications 
for Android devices
Implement icons and themes in an 
application
Create control structures in an 
application
Use lists and arrays in an 
application

Written: Exams and 
programming assignments.
Verbal: Class discussion and 
responses, group discussion and 
responses.
Use current techniques, 
skills, and tools with 
computer programming 
languages to solve real-
world problems.

Implement audio, graphics and 
animation in an application

Written: Exams and 
programming assignments.
Verbal: Class discussion and 
responses, group discussion and 
responses

Mobile Computing	1	2013
