            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Union County College

Course Number: CIS 210

Course Name: Principles of Information Security

Credits: 3

Prerequisites: ENG 101

Course Description:

This course introduces the student to the field of information

security. It presents both the

managerial and technical components of security. Students will

learn about the legal,

ethical and professional issues in Information Security. Other

topics include logical and

physical design for security, implementing security, and

maintaining security.

Prerequisites: ENG 089 and 099. 3 lecture hours. 3 credits.

Course Objectives:

Upon completion of this course the student should be able to:

. Understand the meaning of information security and its

importance

. Understand the role of computer security in the evolution of

information security

. List and explain the phases of the security systems development

life cycle

. Discuss career opportunities in information security

. Differentiate between threats to information systems from

attacks against

information systems

. Differentiate between laws and ethics as they relate to the

practice of information

security

.

Understand the role of culture as it applies to ethics in

information security

. Understand the concepts of risk management and risk

identification

. Discuss risk control strategies

. Understand the role of information security policy, standards,

and practices

. Explain the major components of an information security

blueprint

. Explain the components of an incident response plan

. Define disaster recovery plan

. Discuss encryption-symmetric and asymmetric

. Understand the concepts and differentiate between physical and

logical security

. Understand the need for a security maintenance program

. Locate, discern, and effectively use information to solve

issues and/or problems in

information security

Required Materials:

Whitman and Mattord. Principles of Information Security. Course

Technology, 2003.

Grading Procedures

Assignments/Homework 30

Tests 30

Final Exam/Final Project/Research Paper 40
