Help Desk Concepts and Customer Service                         1     2003

                      UNION COUNTY COLLEGE

                            Syllabus

             Help Desk Concepts and Customer Service

                                

                                

  I.   Course ID (department and course number)

       Business Department CIS 140

       

  II.  Course name

       Help Desk Concepts and Customer Service



  III. Number of credits awarded for course

       3

       

IV.  Prerequisite or co-requisite courses or academic standing

(if applicable)

N/A

  

  V.   Indicate if new or modified course (if modified course, list

       old course ID)

       modified

       

VI.  Semester and year course will first be offered (or, if a

modified course, semester and year when revised course will first

be offered)

Fall 2003



VII. Name and telephone number or e-mail address of department

chair or other appropriate contact person

Paula Belmonte, Chairman, Business Department

Belmonteucc.edu or 908-709-7095



  VIII.     Detailed Course Description

       This course provides an overview of the topics relevant to

       working at a help desk including customer service skills. Topics

       discussed in this course include: help desk concepts, roles and

       responsibilities, help desk operations, help desk processes and

       procedures, tools and technologies, performance measures,

       ergonomics, customer satisfaction, listening and communication

       skills, handling difficult customers, solving and preventing

       problems, and more.



  IX.

       Outline of Course Objectives

       a.   The role of help desks

       b.   Different types of customer service and support organization

       c.   Benefits and challenges of centralized and decentralized

          help desks

       d.   Skills and responsibilities of help desk personnel

e.   Common processes of the help desk

       f.   Influential factors for location and layout of help desks

       g.   Importance on listening and communication skills

       h.   Telephone skills needed by help desk staff

i.   Common telephone call handling mistakes

       j.   How to deal with irate customers

       k.   Techniques used to minimize anger and stress



  X.   Texts, Journals, and other materials used in course

           A Guide to Help Desk Concepts, Donna Knapp, Course

          Technology, 2002.

           A Guide to Customer Service Skills for the Help Desk

          Professional, Donna Knapp, Course Technology, 1999.

           Various Internet sites

           One ZIP disk or CD-RW, or other storage medium device. It is

          important that you save all your work until your final grade has

          been received.

       

  XI.  Grading Procedures

       Assignments              40

       Tests                    40

       Final Exam               20



  XII. Number of assignments, tests, and examinations

       16 assignments

       8 tests

       1 final examination

       

  XIII.     Schedule of topics to be covered

       

  

      Week                       Topics

       1     Introduction to Help Desk Concepts

       2     Help Desk Operations

       3     Promoting the Electronic Web Site

       4     TEST 1

            Infrastructure

            Components of an electronic store

       5     Design and create online stores

       6     Design and create online stores

            Electronic commerce security

       7     Electronic commerce security

            TEST 2

       8     Electronic Payment Systems

       9     International, legal, and ethics issues

       10    International, legal, and ethics issues

            TEST 3

       11    Creating a Web Page

       12    Web Fundamentals and HTML

       13    Strategies of Marketing

            Promoting and Advertising an Ecommerce

            Initiative

       14    TEST 4

            Developing Ideas and Creating Business Plans

            for Web enterprises

       15    Developing Ideas and Creating Business Plans

            for Web enterprises
