



        Syllabus for Data Communications and Networks

                              

  I.   Course ID (department and course number)

       Business Department CIS 205

       

  II.  Course name

       Data Communications and Networks

       

III. Number of credits awarded for course

3



  IV.  Prerequisite or co-requisite courses or academic

       standing (if applicable)

       CIS 101 or CIS 120

       

  V.   Indicate if new or modified course (if modified course,

       list old course ID)

       modified

       

VI.  Semester and year course will first be offered (or, if a

modified course, semester and year when revised course will

first be offered)

Fall 2003



VII. Name and telephone number or e-mail address of

department chair or other appropriate contact person

Patricia Rodihan, Director of Computer Science programs

rodihanucc.edu



  VIII.     Detailed Course Description

       This course teaches students the basics of business

       data communications and networks. It includes both

       recent data communications trends and fundamental

       concepts. Students are introduced to the many types of

       connections found within computer networks, the

       technologies necessary to connect computers and

       networks, and actions that occur when a data

       transmission produces an error. Topics include:

       firewall, network operating systems,

       telecommunications, ethics, and security.

  

  IX.  Outline of Course Objectives



           Define the basic terminology of computer networks

           Outline the basic network configurations

           Distinguish local area networks, metropolitan area

          networks, and wide area networks from each other

    List the layers of the OSI (Open Systems

Interconnection) model and describe the duties of each layer

           List the layers of the Internet model and describe the

          duties of each layer

    Recognize the difference among half duplex, full duplex,

and simplex connections

    Identify the three basic components of a signal as

amplitude, frequency, and phase

    Discuss bandwidth of a signal and how it relates to data

transfer speed

           Recognize the concepts of basic security measures

           List basic techniques used to discover and eliminate

          viruses

    Discuss the advantages and uses of digital certificates

           Describe the basic types of firewall protection

     

  X.   Texts, Journals, and other materials used in course

       Business Data Communications: Introductory Concepts and

       Techniques, 3rd ed. Shelly, Cashman, Serwatka, Course

       Technology, 2001.

       Three 3 High-Density Disks (IBM format) or one (100MB) ZIP

       disk.

  

  XI.  Grade determinants

       Tests                 40

       Assignments           30

       Research paper             10

       Final exam                 20

       

  XII. Number of papers and examinations

       4 tests

       1 cumulative final exam

       1 research paper

       

       A research component allows students to evaluate and

       assess integrated information on a related topic. This

       component provides students with the opportunity to

       locate, discern, criticize and effectively utilize

       information on a topic related to this course. A

       cumulative final exam covers all topics offered during

       the semester.

  

  XIII.     Schedule of topics to be covered

       

       Week 1    Introduction to Data Communications and

       Networks

       

       Week 2    Fundamentals of Data and Signals

       

       Week 3    Hardware-wires, cables, wireless

       transmissions

       

       Week 4    Test 1

               Modems and connections

       

       Week 5    Multiplexing

       

       Week 6    Error Detection

       

       Week 7    Test 2

               The Basics of Local Area Networks

                 Topologies and protocols

       

       Week 8    Connecting LANs

                 Bridges, hubs, switches, servers, routers

       

       Week 9    LANs - Software and Support Systems,

                 Novell, Microsoft, Unix, Linux, OS/2

       

       Week 10   Test 3

               Wide Area Networks

                 Basics, routing, congestion

       

       Week 11   The Internet

                 Internet services and protocols

       

       Week 12   Telecommunication Systems

       

       Week 13   Network Security

                 Basic measures, encryption, firewalls,

       policies

       

       Week 14   Test 4

               Network Design and Management



       Week 15Review



       Final Exam
