            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Operating Systems for Help Desk 1 4/13/2004 1:26 PM

Union County College

Course Number: CIS 107

Course Name: Operating Systems for Help Desk

Credits: 3

Prerequisites: ENG 089, ENG 099

Course Description:

This course is a survey of todays leading operating systems.

Students learn operating

systems from both an end-user and administrative standpoint. 3

lecture hours and 1

laboratory hour. 3 credits.

Course Objectives:

Upon completion of this course the student should be able to:

 Define the term operating system

 Explain the three different types of user interfaces.

 Understand how the operating system handles resources.

 Understand how the operating system handles files

 Discuss the evolution of the microcomputer and different

operating systems over

time



Describe the main features of a Windows operating system

 Understand the basic functionalities of the Linux operating

system

 Describe the Linux file system

 Describe the unique features that make Linux different from

other operating

systems



Explain how the Macintosh mouse and keyboard are different from

those on a PC

and know how to use them.

 Tell the difference between Aqua, Darwin, and Classic.

 Use the parts of Mac OS Xs user interface (desktop, menu bar,

windows, and the

dock).



Manage files using Mac OS X (get info, move, copy, rename,

create, make

aliases, and delete).

 Change system settings using System Preferences (especially

Classic Preferences,

ColorSync Preferences, Display Preferences, Dock Preferences, and

Software

Update Preferences).

 Explain the use of some system utilities to manage disks, find

keystrokes, and

mange printing

 Locate, discern, and effectively use information to solve

issues and/or problems in

operating systems

Required Materials:

Stubbs, Todd and Mary Gorman. Introduction to Operating Systems:

Comprehensive

Course. Course Technology, 2003.
