http://www.njtransfer.org/                       May 7, 2003

                                     Professor E K Hawthorne

             NJ Transfer for Web and Multimedia

                              

  I.   Course ID (department and course number)

       Business department and CIS 124

       

  II.  Course name

       Web and Multimedia

       

III. Number of credits awarded for course

3



  IV.  Prerequisite or co-requisite courses or academic

       standing (if applicable)

       CIS 120

       

  V.   Indicate if new or modified course (if modified course,

       list old course ID)

       New

       

  VI.  Semester and year course will first be offered (or, if

       a modified course, semester and year when revised course

       will first be offered)

       Fall 2003

       

VII. Name and telephone number or e-mail address of

department chair or other appropriate contact person

Patricia Rodihan, Director of Computer Science programs

rodihanucc.edu



VIII.     Detailed course description

This lecture-based and hands-on course introduces students

to a breadth of Web-based multimedia elements: typography,

still graphics, animation, digital audio, and digital

video. The primary focus is on Web-based concepts,

terminology, media elements, planning, and design, as well

as the emerging software used to create and distribute

interactive, Web-based multimedia applications. Students

learn what multimedia is and why it is so important.

Students learn practical applications as well as

relevant trends and issues surrounding multimedia such as

copyright laws and Web page accessibility for all persons

regardless of ability. During hands-on laboratories,

students will use many different software programs to create

fancy text, still graphics, animation, digital audio and

digital video.  Students will also use two types of digital

cameras to acquire original, copyright-free photographs and

video footage.



  IX.  Outline of course objectives

        Understand the history of the Internet and the World Wide

       Web.

        Understand the evolution of multimedia, and how Web-based

       multimedia is both similar and different from other types of

       multimedia.

        Understand the importance of compression for each type of

       multimedia element being delivered over the Web.

        Realize the various job positions in this expanding field.

        Understand copyright laws and how they apply to each of

       the multimedia elements of a Web site.

        Understand section 108 of the American Disabilities Act

       regarding Web page accessibility for all persons regardless

       of ability.

        Create the planning documents and storyboard for an

       interactive, multimedia Web site.

        Implement from conception an interactive, multimedia Web

       site.

        Create an Adobe PDF file.

        Use a digital still camera.

        Use a digital video camera.

        Use a bitmapped-base graphics creation and editing

       program.

        Use a vector-based graphics creation and editing program.

        Use a frame-based animation program.

        Use a path-based animation program.

        Use an audio capture and editing program to convert analog

       sound to digital sound.

        Use a video capture and editing program to convert analog

       video to digital video.

        Use an authoring program such as Macromedia Dreamweaver

       and Microsoft FrontPage to create an interactive, multimedia

       Web site.

        Write pure HTML code.

        Write simple scripting code.

       

  X.   Texts, Journals, and other materials used in course

       

        Multimedia and the Web: Creating the Digital Excitement by

       Calleen Coorough. 2001 Harcourt College Publishers.  ISBN 0-

       03-032188-3.

       

        Association for Computing Machinery digital library.

       

  XI.  Grade determinants

       3 exams                         60 (20 each)

       1 information literacy assignment              20

       Multimedia projects and portfolio assignments  20

       

  XII. Number of papers and examinations

       3 exams

       1 information literacy assignment

       

  XIII.     Schedule of topics to be covered

        The Internet and Web-based multimedia.

        Various career paths in this expanding field.

        Understanding copyright laws.

        Planning and storyboarding the multimedia Web site

       including a complete design strategy, as well as

       organizational and navigational structures.

        Designing the user interface and Web page

       accessibility.

        Creating text, typography, cascading style sheets,

       and Adobe PDF files.

        Creating still graphics and comparing graphic file

       formats.

        Creating animation, both frame-based and vector-

       based.

        Creating digital audio, both downloadable and

       streaming file formats.

        Creating digital video, both downloadable and

       streaming file formats.

        Using HTML and different types of Web authoring

       systems.

        Comparing different markup languages such as SGML,

       HTML, DHTML, VRML, SMIL, XML, and WML.

        Comparing and using scripting languages.
