            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Instructor's Syllabus

Course No.
Title
CST 162
Computer Algorithms

Course Description:

This course introduces students to the logic used to develop solutions to common 
problems in the computer science field. These step-by-step detail solutions are called 
algorithms and serve as the basic methods utilized in most computer problems. In the 
lab component of this course these algorithms are written and tested in a current 
programming language. Topics include number systems, logical operators, one and 
two-dimensional arrays and methods of sorting arrays, graphs of functions, and string 
manipulation. Prerequisite: CST 161.
4 hours per week. 4 credits.

General Objectives:

Upon successfully completing this course the student should be able to:

1.	Describe and effectively use several problem solving methods, including at least 
one tool and multiple techniques, to represent an algorithm in a computing 
environment.
2.	Represent the solution to moderately complex problems using a higher-level 
computer language.
3.	Explain the nature of data, how it may be represented in a higher-level language, 
stored and represented in a computing environment.
4.	Identify and describe how the computing machine components support the 
execution of a program.
5.	Develop algorithms that employ those common logic and data structures native 
to most higher-level computer languages.
6.	Design, code, debug and document program using techniques of good 
pro9gramming style.
7.	Identify the four core and five related areas of study within the Computer Science 
discipline.
8.	Identify the objectives common to object-oriented problem solving and object- 
oriented languages;

Text:
We will use an eText (electronic text) this semester. 
Sign up at zyBooks.com
Enter zyBook code UCCCST162DzubackSpring2017
Click Subscribe



The cost to subscribe is $67; any applicable returning student discounts will be applied 
automatically. The student subscriptions will be valid through 05/30/17.

Materials:

1.	Required - The text, the Sun/Oracle Java compiler (available at the Oracle 
website) and a text editor (Eclipse for example) or Integrated Development 
Environment. Details for downloading and installing the compiler and editor are 
available on the course website.
2.	Required - flash/micro drive for laboratory -- 512Mb minimum.
3.	Optional - 'Draw' software (Visio from Microsoft or SmartDraw for example) 
available which contain flowchart symbols in their 'Symbol Library' which can be 
used in place of a physical template. The costs for this type of software may run 
as little as $50 or as much as $200.

Course Grades & Grading Policy:

Evaluation Elements for Fall 2015 Semester
Evaluation Element
Weight
(3) 1 Hour examinations
45%
(1) Final examination
25%
Assigned Homework
05%
Laboratory Works
25%


Scoring Each Evaluation Element

The scoring systems employed for Examinations, Laboratory Assignments and 
Programming Projects all involve numeric conversions. I will record in the grade book a 
series of numeric values for each of the examinations, laboratory assignments and 
programming projects you complete. That 'score' can be converted into an equivalent 
'letter' grade. The scores will be, according to the Instructor's Syllabus, averaged or 
accumulated and then 'weighted' with the other elements of your grade to produce a 
numeric value that itself will be converted to a 'letter' grade equivalent and (at the end 
of the semester) reported to the Registrar as your final course grade for this semester.

Examinations

Each examination will have between 1 and 'N' points allocated to the internal parts (or 
sections). The sum of these parts will represent the total number of points for the 
examination. The number of points earned for each part will be summed and that sum 
then divided by the total number of points for the examination. The quotient will be 
multiplied by 100 (this represents the percentage of points earned out of the total 
number of points that you could have earned). That percentage will be recorded in my


gradebook as your score for that examination. You may convert (for reference 
purposes) the percentage score into a letter grade using the UCC conversion
system. The two highest examination scores will be averaged to produce a percentage 
that will be applied to the weight given for the in class examinations component of your 
final grade.

For Example: If the average of your two highest examination scores is 90% and the 
weight accorded to examinations is 40 points, you would earn 36 points (or 90%) out of 
a possible 40 points for examinations.



Homework Assignments

Each Assignment will have an announced value between 5 and 20. You will receive a 
numeric value between 0 and 'n' (where 'n' represents the full value of the assignment, 
in 1/2 point increments) that represents the 'score' for that particular assignment. You 
can convert that score into a 'letter' grade by dividing the assigned score by the 
announced value and multiplying by 100 to produce a percent.  Your scores for all of the 
Assignments will be accumulated and divided by the total number of points you could 
have earned, to produce a percentage score of your Assignments. That Project and 
Assignment score will be 'weighted' for your final grade.

For Example: If the sum of your Assignments is 38 points and a total of 8 Assignments 
valued at 40 points were given, you earned 38 of a possible 40 points or 95% of the 
possible points. That percentage will be scaled into the 'weight' accorded to Project 
and Assignment Work. If the weight is 10% of your grade, then you will earn 9.5 points 
for Assignment and Project Work.

Please note that you may earn less than the total number of possible points for an 
Assignment for any of the following reasons:

1.	Material requested turned in after due date (1/2 point for each class after due 
date).
2.	Answers were incomplete - not all questions answered (not less than 1/2 point).
3.	Answer were incorrect (not less than 1/2 point).
4.	All materials requested not turned in (not less than 1/2 point).



Summing Up...

The values derived for each component will be added to produce a numeric 'score' in 
the range of 0 through 100. That score will be converted to a final (letter) grade based 
on the UCC numeric scale system (< 60 = 'F', 60-64 = 'D', 65-69 = 'D+', 70-74 = 'C', 
75-79 = 'C+', etc. - consult the 2015-16 UCC Catalog for details).




Final Examination Exemption:

Students may earn a 'waiver' from the Final Examination this semester. This exemption 
will be earned if:

1.	You take all three scheduled class examinations and
2.	You earn a score of 90 or greater on each of those three examinations and
3.	You must have at least a 90 average in the post lab problems, homework and 
laboratory work.

Concluding thoughts...a 'waiver' from the Final Examination implies you have 
maintained an 'A' level work in every (gradable) portion of this course.  I will make 
every effort to evaluate, grade and return each homework, laboratory and project 
assignment you submit in a timely fashion (1 or 2 classes after you submit it to me). 
Please keep your own records of these assignments should questions arise later about 
that component of your grade.  I will try to maintain an 'up-to-date' grade book 
throughout the semester and should be able, upon request, give you a summary of your 
grades.  .Given the cumulative nature of the grading system used in this course, your 
grade may fluctuate quite a bit over the course of the semester, especially between the 
first and second examinations.

COURSE POLICIES

Preparing for Examinations
Attend lectures and laboratories. Typically one week in advance of an announced exam 
I will post a Study Guide for that examination on the course website. The Study Guide 
includes an outline of the topics to be tested, along with chapter references and 
suggested exercises to perform.

Appeals Policy
To appeal a grade, send an email to your instructor's email address within five days of 
the grade having been posted. Overdue appeals will not be considered.

Incomplete Policy
Students will not be given an incomplete grade in the course without sound reason and 
documented evidence as described in the Union County Catalog. In any case, for a 
student to receive an incomplete, he or she must be passing and must have completed 
a significant portion of the course.

Cheating Policy
Students are expected to uphold the school's standard of conduct relating to academic 
honesty. Students assume full responsibility for the content and integrity of the 
academic work they submit. The guiding principle of academic integrity shall be that a


student's submitted work, examinations, reports, and projects must be that of the 
student's own work. Students shall be guilty of violating the honor code if they:

1.	Represent the work of others as their own.
2.	Use or obtain unauthorized assistance in any academic work.
3.	Give unauthorized assistance to other students.
4.	Modify, without instructor approval, an examination, paper, record, or report for the 
purpose of obtaining additional credit.
5.	Misrepresent the content of submitted work.

The penalty for violating the honor code is severe. Any student violating the honor code 
is subject to receive a failing grade for the course and may be subject to disciplinary 
action as described in the Union County Catalog. If a student is unclear about whether a 
particular situation may constitute an honor code violation, the student should meet with 
the instructor to discuss the situation.
Each student must develop his or her own solutions to the assigned homework and 
laboratory exercises. Students may not 'work together' on graded assignments. Such 
collaboration constitutes cheating. A student may not use or copy (by any means) 
another's work (or portions of it) and represent it as his/her own. If you need help on an 
assignment, contact your instructor, not other classmates.

Disabilities Policy
In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), all qualified students 
enrolled in this course are entitled to 'reasonable accommodations.' Please notify the 
instructor during the first week of class of any accommodations needed for the course. 
Any student with special needs that will affect performance in this class should feel free 
to make an appointment to talk with me during office hours or contact the disabilities 
counselor in the Counseling office on the Cranford Campus.
Rev. 01/21/17 
CST162Syl170123.docx
