            This syllabus is representative of the course content.

           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.



              Women In Mathematics and Science



Course Description



This course will focus on the contributions of women to the

disciplines of mathematics and science, with both historical

and contemporary references. Discussions will emphasize the

obstacles encountered in entering these fields as a result

of gender issues, as well as the impact these women have had

upon their fields and society as a whole. Current trends in

education and employment for women in the fields of

mathematics and science will be explored. Course structure

will combine a mix of lectures, discussion, group work,

films and guest speakers.

3 Credit Hours      3 Lecture Hours

Prerequisite:  MAT117 or higher (MAT125 recommended)



Course Objectives

      Demonstrate critical thinking in discussions and

  completion of research projects relevant to women in the

  sciences.

      Communicate effectively with others in group projects,

  interviews, and presentations.

      Demonstrate an awareness of the diverse factors that

  influence the role of women in the sciences by examining

  historical and contemporary trends in the sciences.

      Learn independently and direct their own course of

  learning and specialization and be able to present those

  findings to a group of peers.

      Recognize the basic differences of gender and sexuality

  that vary across time, place, politics and ideologies for

  women in the sciences.

      Compare and contrast the role and portrayal of women in

  the sciences, particularly at the time of significant

  scientific endeavors.

      Demonstrate knowledge of the important female figures

  within the sciences.

      Discuss the specific contributions of selected women to

  the fields of science.

      Recognize the need for continuing efforts to assure

  equality of women in the sciences.



Rationale



Mathematics and science are critical fields in our society,

making a study of women in these disciplines an essential

component of any Womens Studies Program. Careers in

mathematics and science have been documented as areas in

which there is tremendous growth, but where there is a

substantial shortage and/or retention of women.

Organizations in mathematics and science setting forth

current educational guidelines have identified the need to

examine the role of women and minorities in these

disciplines.

The objectives of this course are consistent with the

mission and goals of the college.

  

  

  

Transferability (within Womens Studies context as a program

elective)



This course is consistent with other community college

courses that have been transferred to four-year institutions

such as Rutgers, Montclair, and Drew.



Resources and Costs



Faculty and students will have the use of standard college

resources including library and computer labs for text,

journal, computer/web site, and video supplements to the

course. A few new items such as books or videos to have on

reserve may be necessary. Nominal costs for occasional guest

speakers will be needed.



Course Outline



Time                Topic



2 Weeks             Introduction/Background/

                    Culture  Difficulties Encountered



2 Weeks             Highlight Key Figures/Sample Biographies



1 Week              Selected Film Highlighting Key Female

Personality

                    or Related Course Topic



3 Weeks             Group Work in Class and

                    Student Presentations of Research



1 Week              Group Work Culmination

                    Summary/Discussion/Essay



1 Week              Guest Speaker Relevant to Course Topics



1 Week              Discussion/Impact of Math/Science/Tech

on Women

                    Outline Interview Assignment



1 Week              Interview Assignment



2 Weeks             Interview Discussions



1 Week              Selected Readings and/or Film

Discussions

                    Portrayals of Women in these Disciplines



1 Week              Current Trends/Summarize









Evaluation



Grading will be based on:



Attendance/Participation                     10

Research Paper/Presentation                       40

Essay/Midterm (Compare  Contrast Selected Bios)  35

Interviews/Presentation                      15



Text



No Required Texts. There will be a variety of assigned

readings from a variety of print and online media resources.

The readings will vary to some extent each time the course

is presented, depending on the needs and preferences of the

class and contemporary events.



References
