            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

COURSE NUMBER & NAME:  	MAT 280-299	Projects in Mathematics

LECTURE/LAB HOURS:	3 lecture hours

CREDITS:     3 credit hours. 

PREREQUISITES:  Permission of the Instructor

COURSE DESCRIPTION:
Particular topics in mathematics are explored. Topics covered change from 
semester to semester. Examples are: Mathematics in Art and Music, The 
Development of Mathematics, Design of Experiments, Non-Euclidean 
Geometries, Game Theory, and Basic Concepts of Modern Algebra.

COURSE OBJECTIVES/STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES:

Students will be able to:

* Conduct in-depth research about a topic in mathematics, and comprehend 
and evaluate mathematical resources.
* Demonstrate the ability to evaluate sources, utilize mixed media (print 
and electronic) and properly reference materials using APA style to 
document their research. 
* Demonstrate critical thinking skills in evaluating research and forming 
conclusions.
* Construct graphs and charts, interpret them, and draw appropriate 
conclusions.
* Identify a problem and analyze it in terms of its significant parts and 
the information needed to solve it.
* Formulate and evaluate possible solutions to problems, and select and 
defend the chosen solutions.
* Identify real-world problems and their relationship to mathematical 
methods.
* Communicate and discuss mathematical problems and solutions.
* Write clear and logical discussions on mathematical topics.

STUDENT RESOURCES:

There is no required text.  The student?s professor/mentor will direct 
the student toward appropriate texts, journals, web sites, and resources.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

The student is required to receive approval of their topic by the 
professor/mentor.
The student must submit a detailed, written, outline of the project for 
approval.
The student will sign a contract with the professor/mentor BEFORE 
beginning the project.
The student will submit the final project (paper) for a grade in the 
course.

EVALUATION METHODS:

    Research paper/project

CLASS SCHEDULE:

The topic that is selected should be one of interest to the student and 
must have the approval of the student?s professor/mentor.  The 
professor/mentor will work with the student to determine an appropriate 
timeline and meet with the student as needed.  
  SUGGESTED TEACHING METHODOLOGIES:

Lecture, discussion, presentations, multimedia/technology, conference 
attendance, projects, experiments, demonstrations, charts and graphs, and 
any sharing of information appropriate to the research experience.
CORRELATION OF PROGRAM or GENERAL EDUCATION OUTCOMES, STUDENT OUTCOMES, 
ASSESSMENT METHODS, & DATA COLLECTION

Objectives:Student Learning Outcomes Assessment Techniques & Data 
CollectionConduct in-depth research and comprehend and evaluate 
mathematical resources.Demonstrate ability to comprehend and evaluate 
mathematical resources through completion of research.Research 
Paper/Project  Demonstrate the ability to evaluate sources, utilize mixed 
media (print and electronic) and properly reference materials using APA 
style to document their research. Demonstrate ability to comprehend and 
evaluate resources and properly reference them through completion of 
research paper/project.Research Paper/Project    Demonstrate critical 
thinking skills in evaluating research and forming 
conclusions.Demonstrate ability to conduct research, investigate 
evidence, draw and support conclusions, and express these findings 
through discussions and research.Discussion

Research Paper/ProjectConstruct graphs and charts, interpret them, and 
draw appropriate conclusions.Demonstrate ability to construct and 
interpret graphs and charts in discussion, and in completion of 
assignment.Discussion

Research Paper/ProjectIdentify a problem and analyze it in terms of its 
significant parts and the information needed to solve it.Demonstrate 
ability to identify parts of a problem and significant information to 
solve through discussions and completion of assignment. Discussion

Research Paper/ProjectFormulate and evaluate possible solutions to 
problems, and select and defend the chosen solutions.Demonstrate ability 
to formulate and evaluate solutions to problems, and to defend solutions 
through discussions and completion of assignment.Discussion

Research Paper/ProjectIdentify real-world problems and their relationship 
to mathematical methods.Demonstrate ability to identify real-world 
problems and their corresponding mathematical methods through discussion 
and independent research.Discussion

Research Paper/ProjectCommunicate and discuss mathematical problems and 
solutions.Demonstrate ability to communicate and discuss mathematical 
problems and solutions through discussions and final product.Discussion

Research Paper/Project
Write clear and logical discussions on mathematical topics.Demonstrate 
ability to write clear and logical discussions on mathematical topics 
through completion of research.Research Paper/Project

REVISED:  December 2011


