            This syllabus is representative of the course content.
           Requirements for individual course sections may vary.

Computer Science 200

Database Management Concepts

Credits: 3.0

Prerequisite: Computer Science 103 (Introduction to

Computing) or Computer Science 112 (Microcomputer Software

Applications)

New Course -  Spring 2004



Susan Franciosi

Area Coordinator, Computer Science, Graphics, Multimedia

franciosiwarren.edu



            This course will focus on database design, implementation

and administration.

            It will cover methods and procedures used in the design and

development of relational databases. Topics will include

database development, database design, query and report

processing, principles of security, introduction to user

interface design, macros and the basics of web/database

connectivity. Students will use a popular microcomputer

relational database management system.



Course Objectives:    By the end of the course the student

                      will be able to:



1.   Define database management systems.

2.   Identify the components of a database program.

3.   Describe the guidelines for designing databases and

setting field properties.

4.   Create and maintain a database using the features in a

popular software program.

5.   Explain and demonstrate how to retrieve information

from a database.

6.   Demonstrate how to create forms and reports for data

entry and presenting data.

7.   Integrate a database with the Web and other programs.

8.   Use macros to create a graphical user interface.

9.   Write Visual Basic for applications code.

10.  Manage and secure a database.



Text:

New Perspectives on Microsoft Access 2002, Comprehensive

Joseph J. Adamski, Kathleen T. Finnegan

Publisher: Course Technology Thomson Learning

Bibliography/Supplementary Materials:

A.   CD  - Data disks

B.   Online - www.course.com/NewPerspectives

C.   Additional assigned reading with relevance to the topic

under discussion, including magazines and newspaper

articles.



Grade Determinants:

3 Exams             45

Weekly Internet Projects 40

Lab Exercises            15



Course Topics:

I. Introduction to Database Management Systems

   A. Database Concepts

   B. Organizing Data

   C. Databases and Relationships

   D. Relational Database Management Systems

II.   Creation and Maintenance of a Database

   A. Designing and Creating a Database

   B. Modifying a Database

   C. Importing Data from another Source

III.  Retrieving Information from a Database

   A. Creating and modifying a query

   B. Defining Table Relationships

   C. Sorting and Filtering Data

IV.   Forms and Reports

   A. Designing and Creating a Form and Subforms

   B. Designing and Creating a Report

V. Enhancing the Components of a Database

   A. Setting Field Parameters

   B. Creating a Custom and Multi-page Forms

   C. Filtering Data Using a Form

VI.   Custom Reports

   A. Designing and Creating a Custom Report

   B. Adding a Subreport

   C. Creating Mailing Labels

VII.  Integrating a Database with the Web and Other Programs

   A. Exporting Data into an HTML document

   B. Updating Data on a Data Access Page

   C. Creating and Using a PivotTable

   D. Importing and Exporting Data into Other Programs

VIII. Enhancing User Interaction with Action Queries

   A.   Using Wizards to Create Queries

B.   Creating and Using Action Queries

C.   Establishing Relationships Between Database Tables

IX.   Automating Tasks with Macros

   A.   Implementing a Graphical User Interface

B.   Macro Groups and SQL

C.   Creating a Switchboard

X. Using and Writing Visual Basic for Applications Code

   A. Visual Basic for Applications

   B. Creating an Event Procedure

   C. Coding Procedures for Queries

XI.   Managing and Securing a Database

   A. Analyze Database Performance

   B. Securing an Database
